Special Olympics, Meditation, jobs in China, Unimpossible Missions
Hi again.  Here are a few non-112 events and opportunities that may be of interest to 112 students and CA's:
 
Special Olympics
A current 112 student is a member of the Special Olympics committee, and has asked that I post this (which I am happy to do, as this is a wonderful event that I do hope some of you participate in (interesting aside: helping others (especially those most in need) is an amazingly effective de-stressor, not to mention generally a very nice thing to do)):

We are hosting the western PA sectional competition for the Special Olympics this weekend on Saturday. I was wondering if you could make an announcement to the 112 class, its a great way to get involved in the CMU community and the Pennsylvania community as a whole.
Here's the link to the sign up sheet.
**some corrections are the fist shift is 8:00 am - 11:00 am and the last shift is 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm** 

Talk on ?Stress Management and Meditation?
Everyday stress is a normal part of life, and is not a problem so long as we manage it well, with sleep, exercise, socializing, etc.  Meditation may be helpful in this regard, too, and at this time of the semester, we can use all the stress management tools we can get.  With that in mind, Student Affairs is hosting a talk on Stress Management and Meditation by Swami Sarvadevananda tomorrow (Wed) at 7pm in DH A302.

Opportunities with high-growth Chinese startups (Idea Bulb VC)
Idea Bulb VC is a Chinese Venture Capital firm with some CMU connections (though I have no connection with them, and know nothing more than what is said here about them) backing a large and growing collection of startups, both in China and beyond.  They visited recently, and they are chiefly looking for students interested in working in startups located in China, though they have a presence in many other locations as well.  These are chiefly full-time jobs, but who knows, maybe you can muster an internship with enough pluck.   Here are some job descriptions:  megvil_face.pdf, 4paradigm.pdf, and dorabot.pdf.   If you are interested, contact Li Ren:

<renli@chuangxin.com>
GE Un-impossible Missions Contest
Some folks from GE were here recently talking about a really curious and unusual and maybe compelling contest (see here).  It is due June 14th, so you could focus on this after finals.  Prizes are kind of big:  $100k and paid internships.  Money aside, this could be fun and enriching.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

User-Study-a-Thon notes (Reminder: bring laptops/demos to class today)
Hi all.  Here we are at the User-Study-a-Thon (always a fun time, truly)!  Woohoo!  A few notes:
 
Bring a working demo of your project to class today
The point of class is to demo your projects to each other.  Please be prepared to do so.

If you don't have a working demo
Then perhaps bring a video of a recently-working version, or a somewhat-working version, or a demo of an earlier version, etc.   If you don't have that, bring storyboards.  But bring *something* to share with classmates and get their feedback.

Speaking of feedback
The whole point of today is to give and get respectful, constructive feedback.  Telling someone "wow, that's nice" is nice, but not constructive.  Better would be "wow, that's nice, but this could perhaps make it better, or have you thought of that, or what about this?"  Better.  Let's all be very open to honest constructive feedback, and let's all provide the same in a very supportive environment.

Besides, it's required
Yes, attending and fully participating today is required, but so is doing something about it afterwards.  In your writeup, you need to include a brief reflection on the feedback you received and then some brief demonstration of "iterative design", so you take some of that feedback to heart and actually change your design in some way -- some very small way, given the tight timing of the upcoming deadline.

"The user is always right"
This is a common saying in industry.  The point is:  no matter how wonderful and clever and intuitive you may think your product is, if users don't agree, then it's not.  Users are the final arbiters for products.  So:  today, listen with open minds.  Don't talk much if at all, just listen, and type what you hear into a transcript.  Then review the transcripts (you'll do this several times today) and look for trends, and that's where you invest your energy.  If one user says something, maybe they are an outlier.  But if most users say the same thing, then that's a thing, and you should take it seriously.

Have fun!
Today is always a fun day.  It is also very helpful, but always lighthearted fun.  Let's keep it that way!

Carpe diem.

David

Thoughts du jour (the TP homestretch)
Hi all.  I hope you are off to a great start to this radiant spring day.  And some thoughts as we are now in the homestretch of the semester...
 
Keep your balance
Do what you can in the time you have, but do no more.  There is no need for heroics here.  Just do your best, and you'll be fine.  And by "your best", this means while getting enough sleep, and attending to your other courses and commitments.

Work with your mentors
They are there to help.  Use their help!  They can help you make the best decisions on where to invest your efforts from here on out.

Get an MVP working
An "MVP" in industry is a "Minimum Viable Product".  The same thing exists here.  Before you add awesome extra features, be sure you have a working basic project, with all the functionality and user experience necessary for that.  Your mentor can help you decide what an MVP means in your case.  Remember: it is always better to have something small and working than large and broken.

Save your working versions
At this stage, term projects tend to move into and back out of working states.  Each time you are in a working state, save an entire copy of your entire project.  This way, you can always fall back on the last working state if you have to.

Backup, backup, backup
We've said this before.  It's really important that you backup your entire project regularly.

More is not always more
Remember that effort is not progress.  If you have 2 levels now, adding 5 more levels might not affect your grade at all.  You can't add lots of C-level features to reach a B, nor lots of B-level features to reach an A.  Upshot:  once you get your MVP working, be very thoughtful about adding a single feature that accomplishes your goals.  If you have just some small amount of time, maybe pick up a point or two by adding some splash screens, help screens, etc.  If you have more time, go after a single lovely new feature rather than lots more of the same.

Fit-and-finish matters
It's amazing how much mileage you can get out of a simple, attractive background picture.  Or changing basic buttons with pretty ones.  Or adding a nice splash screen.  And so on.  While we do not expect you all to be awesome designers, some amount of attention to fit-and-finish goes a surprisingly long way.  You've spent so much time on your core project, it's worth a few hours to wrap it up nicely.

Don't forget your videos
We find the easiest way to cut a video is to use a Mac and Quicktime screen recording feature.  Easy peasy.  A CA will soon post here with more ideas to help you with video creation and editing.  In any case, it can take a while, and you want to have a nice video, since this is the only way most people (like future employers) will ever consume your project.

Try to wrap up your coding today (tomorrow at the latest)
The time to add new features is rapidly closing.  You need time to debug and polish existing features, and then after that time to complete your writeup and make your video.  So you should plan to stop adding new features today or tomorrow at the latest.

Respect the deadline
The deadline is Thursday at 4:30pm, and there are no extensions (except in extreme cases).  Be sure to submit by then.  In fact, we strongly recommend that you submit well before then.

Have fun!!!!
Truly.  Don't get too caught up in this.  This should be a fun experience, and you should be enjoying seeing the fruits of your labors, not torquing yourself over some (predictable) bumps along the way.  You have worked hard for a long time, and now you can design and build your own software.  Awesome!  Don't get caught up on some feature or some bug, and let that ruin the experience.  Drop the feature, ignore the bug, and you're still fine.  Truly.  So keep your balance, have fun, and do your best. 
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Last call for make-up final signups
Last call.  Note that we may relax the 25-hour rule to up to 30 hours, but no more.
 
Also, if you are planning to take the Make-Up Final for medical or other special reasons, please fill out this form today.
Make-Up Final Exam Sign-Up Form (last call!)
Please read this carefully and fill out the form today if it applies to you.  Our scheduled Final Exam is Tue 3-May at 5:30pm.  The Make-Up Final Exam is on Tue 10-May.  Students may only take the 15-112 Make-Up Final Exam if they have explicit permission from Prof Ada or myself via email before 3-May, no exceptions.  We follow university rules for make-ups:  you qualify if you either (a) have an exam at the same date and time as our final exam; or (b) if you have 3 final exams including ours in a 25-hour period.  Those are the only ways to qualify.  If you do qualify under one of these terms, and you wish to sit for our Make-Up Final Exam, then please fill out this form today.  Note that filling out the form does not qualify you to sit for the final -- that only happens once you have email from us with explicit permission.
 
David

Please bring your laptops to class today!
We'll probably be doing some hands-on coding in class, so please bring your laptops.  Thanks.

David

How to manage obstacles (go over, under, around, or just imagine them away!)
Hi again. Another important note.
 
What should you do if you simply cannot solve a technical problem, one that is preventing you from making progress?
 
Good question!
 
And here are some good answers.  Note that this happens all the time in the real world.  And these are tried-and-true real-world solutions:
 
Find a different solution
There are many different ways to solve most problems.  There are different algorithms, different modules, different implementations, etc.  If one path is not working, try another one.

Find a different problem
Often, the way to deal with an obstacle is not to conquer it but to end-run it, to redefine your problem so the obstacle is not on your path.

Simplify the problem
This often works.  Say you can't get general-purpose OCR (optical character recognition) to work.  Then simplify it to only recognize certain fonts, or typed-text, or super-clearly-written text, or just certain letters.  Or say you can't get your Mario-like sprite to move gracefully along arbitrary curves.  Ok, then don't do that.  Use simpler curves, or even just straight lines.  In general, if your problem is too hard, simplify it.  This works wonders!

Reverse engineer the problem from what you can do
We often start TP's (and real-world projects) by forming a clear idea of what we want to build, and then we try to build it.  Great.  But this process can be run in reverse, where you start from what you can build and figure out a clever project that cleverly uses that for maximal gain.  Often, when you fail to implement a feature, the failure is not complete, but rather you come rather close to doing it, and only some nuanced issue stops you.  In such a case, you can almost surely drive this process backwards, and adjust your thinking about that feature to come up with a similar, still-wonderful feature that you actually can build.  Woohoo!

Drop the feature
If you really can't get something to work, drop it and move on.  Save your time and energy for more productive turf.  It may be noble and worthwhile to invest solid effort pursuing some awesome feature.  But at some point you have to accept it if you do not reach that goal, and choose a different goal that is practically achievable in the time you have.  And that often means that the best way to make forward progress is to simply drop a feature and move on with other ones.

Totally change directions
Even now, some of you would benefit from switching projects entirely.  If you are basically stuck on your project, unable to make reliable forward progress every day, then you should switch (though you must first meet with your mentor and get their approval before doing so, so we can help you decide this prudently).  There still remains time to put together a reasonably solid passing project from scratch, and some of you would be well-advised to do that.  If you are in that situation, you will be very happy with the move, even if you suppose otherwise.  Instead of experiencing the serious frustration of being stuck, you'll instead experience the joy and satisfaction of making steady progress towards an outcome you can be proud of.  Indeed, sometimes the way forward is to start over.
 
We are very much here for you.  In particular, we are here to discuss these sorts of strategic trade-offs, to help you be the most effective problem-solver and project-creator you can be.
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

More independence (less piazza, more google) (please read)
Hi all.  I hope you are continuing to enjoy Carnival and the splendid weather.  I also hope you are finding some time to make some progress on your term projects.

Speaking of which...  We are seeing a new trend this semester which is not ideal.  Specifically, we are seeing a huge surge in technical questions -- on piazza, at OH, and via email.  This is new and undesirable.
 
The point of a term project is not for you to merely complete a project, but for you to complete a project working independently.  We know we can code, you have to show us (and yourselves, and your future employers) that you can code.  And you might think that figuring out some nuanced issue with openCV or Django has little to do with that, but in fact the opposite is true.  Much of real-world coding is exactly that -- figuring out how to use complex software (not just how to run some canned demo, but how to really use it and use it well and bend it to your purposes), and doing so with the less-than-stellar real-world resources at your disposal.
 
So: putting that burden on the CA's is very much not in your best interests.
 
Historically, CA's have been available at OH during TP season chiefly for installation issues and 112-style coding and debugging questions.  This semester, however, the quantity and quality of questions have both changed dramatically and for the worse.  We are seeing way, way more questions, and then many/most of them are very specific technical questions that you really need to answer yourself.
 
To wit: typically, the CA's also don't know the answers to these questions.  They use google and figure them out.  That's what you should be doing.
 
Also: not only is this level of excessive handholding actually counterproductive and in fact bad for you, but the CA's don't really have time for it.  As we discussed in class, each CA has 10+ mentors, and they still have grading, normal OH/piazza support (not counting this issue), staff meetings, and the rest of their jobs to do.  That leaves very little time per mentee, just enough to guide you on the Big Picture, to be sure you are headed in good directions, and redirect you if needed.  They do not have time to provide extensive technical supports.  And, again, nor should they.
 
Worst of all:  some of you apparently have become completely dependent on this help.  I have received numerous emails where students complain that they could make better progress if only the CA's were faster and more specific with their answers.  Ugh.  This is confusing the whole point of the project, and undermines everything that the term project is supposed to achieve.  We are helping you become independent problem-solvers.  That cannot happen if you remain dependent on us.
 
Of course, many of you are doing this just great, working strongly independently, solving your problems, conquering each obstacle you face.  Woohoo!  Way to go!  Keep at it!
 
For the rest of you: the time has come for you to do this, too.  Now is the time for you to take that next step, to become a confident, competent, independent coder and problem-solver.
 
We remain here to help.  Truly!  But the nature of our help is generally this:  we will help you figure out how to approach solving your problem, so you know how to solve it, but we will not actually solve it for you.
 
That is a key distinction.  You need to solve your problems.  We are here to help you learn how to do that.  But you still must do the doing.
 
This in no way diminishes our support for you.  Quite the opposite.  But we will not let our love and support for you hold you back.
 
Enjoy a lovely Sunday, and then: trust yourselves, be independent problem-solvers, and make truly wonderful term projects.

Carpe diem.
 
David 

TP announcements
Hi all.  Here are some important TP announcements:
 
No TP deadline extensions
In general, we do not give extensions for TP deadlines (except in obvious extreme cases).  Please plan accordingly.

Installation woes
As many of you are learning, installing modules can be hard, sometimes even impossible.  If you cannot get something installed, we can try to help (for example, try using our installation guidelines we posted here, as many of you are not doing that), but sometimes we also cannot get it working for you.  In such cases, you need to move on to other options.  Do not lose day after day stuck on an installation problem.

Switch now (if you are going to switch)
If you can't get a module installed, or you can't figure out how to use it effectively, or if you can't make steady progress for any reason, now is the time to move on.  It's ok to switch projects, but if you are going to do that, you need to do it now.  Today.  Make the move, and do something that you can safely and reliably build in the remaining time.   For many of you (maybe 50 or so), this is your best option.  Don't hesitate.  Make the move today!   (Aside: note that if you do switch, your previous work still counts towards your tp1 grade.)

No need for external modules
To be very clear, while external/3rd-party modules can be fun and exciting, they can also be an enormous time sink.  And there is no need for them.  We will get probably 200+ wonderful term projects that only use what we covered this semester -- core Python and Tkinter.  That's entirely fine!  Don't convince yourself otherwise.

Anti-p
Everyone should know that we do a thorough anti-plagiarism pass on every tp submission  -- and plagiarism violations on term projects (which do happen on occasion, sigh) generally result in failing the course and letters to the Dean of Student Affairs.  Please be certain to make it very clear what code is your original code, and please be sure to carefully cite all the code that is not your original code.  It is just fine to use other people's code in your term project, but you must cite it very clearly.

Low tp1 grades
While some of you already have 500+ lines of code with working demos (kudos!!!), others of you have made very little progress.  Some of you have no code at all yet.  If you are in that situation, you should expect a very low tp1 grade, say in the 20's or so (or lower, depending).  As this is technically part of a quiz grade, it will not tank your tp grade nor your semester grade.  Even so, it should get your attention, as it is a clear warning from us that you are going to fail your term project if you do not change gears and start making considerable progress and quickly.  Time flies at this time of the semester (especially with Carnival approaching).  It's crucial for you to keep your balance, make good decisions, and make steady progress on your term projects now.

Have fun!
With all that said, let's not lose sight of the bigger picture here.  You should be having fun with your project.  If you're not, then change it.  Do something fun.  Do something you enjoy, that you can make steady progress on, and that you will be proud of when you are done.  If you don't know what that might be, talk to your mentor, talk to Prof Ada or to me, but figure it out.  Do something you enjoy.  Have fun with this.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Midterm2 grades, be a CA!, new OH schedule, and more
Hi all.  I hope you are off to a strong start to this weekend.  This is a crucial weekend TP-wise.  Since many of you may not work too hard during Carnival (which is good -- have fun!), this is one of only two full weekends that many of you can apply to your TP's.   So plan accordingly!  Today is a great time to make great headway on your projects.  I hope you do!

And now, some announcements:
 
Midterm2 grades
We started midterm2 grading yesterday, and the CA?s also finished it yesterday (thanks, CA?s!).  And the results were?  Wonderful!  The median was a rock-solid 80.  This is very good work on some rather challenging material.  Kudos, everyone!

Some details: not everyone has taken midterm2 (so please refrain from discussing its details with them, of course), and we also have not entered a few excused absences, so the gradebook is not 100% complete.  Also, in case you are curious, we converted the hashing Short Answer question into bonus, since nearly nobody got it right.  :-)   We?ll go over it next week.  Top score was 101, with two 100?s right behind.  And again, a median of 80 is indeed solid on this exam.  Great job, everyone!

Be a CA!
We are now accepting applications to join our team of CA?s in the fall (in fact, interviews start today!).   And the only way for us to continue to have an awesome staff (and my gosh, they are awesome!) is to attract a pool of awesome candidates.  So we very much encourage you to apply.  There is no specific grade requirement, though CA?s generally have very high grades (at least A averages on their exams in nearly all cases).  But that?s not a strict rule even.  We are looking for people who know how to code and to problem-solve very well, but much more so who can teach very well and who genuinely love to teach, who will pour their hearts into helping others learn.  If this describes you -- if you have strong grades and a love of teaching, if you want to wear a blue hoodie -- please email me today to apply.

Office hours
Please note that we are now on the Term Project OH schedule (for the CA?s).  The syllabus reflects the new times, which are 6-8pm weekdays and 2-8pm weekends, including today.

Non Nobis Domine
Several of you asked what the music was before the 10:30am midterm.  The first piece was from Bach?s Brandenburg Concertos, and the second was Non Nobis Domine from Henry V (the movie version).  The latter was played not in any religious context (of course), but as it was used in the movie reference itself -- as an expression of gratitude for your collective great victories (academic and otherwise), and to inspire you and all of us on to even greater ones to come.  In truth, every time I hear this song (and I hear it often), I think of you and all the 112 students before you and all to come, and all the amazing things you have all done and surely will do.  It is such an honor to work with all of you.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

TP Mentors, TP Writeup, Quiz10, Hw9 grades, Make-Up Final Exam, and more!
Hi all.  Some announcements:
 
TP Mentors
These have been assigned!  You should hear from your mentor today.  Good luck with your term projects!

TP Writeup
The TP Writeup had some dates from last semester.  These have been updated to this semester.  In particular:
  * tp1 is due Tue 12-Apr at 8pm 
  * tp2 is due Wed 20-Apr at 8pm 
  * tp3 is due Thu 28-Apr at 4:30pm 

Quiz10
As noted in the TP Writeup, quiz10 counts as a quiz but it's not a real quiz.   Rather, you get points for it for attending the post-midterm2 lectures (3 of them), and then tp1 and tp2 get folded into that, too.

Hw9 grades
These are posted now.

Make-Up Final Exam Sign-Up Form (sign up today if you qualify)
Please read this carefully and fill out the form today if it applies to you.  Our scheduled Final Exam is Tue 3-May at 5:30pm.  The Make-Up Final Exam is on Tue 10-May.  Students may only take the 15-112 Make-Up Final Exam if they have explicit permission from Prof Ada or myself via email before 3-May, no exceptions.  We follow university rules for make-ups:  you qualify if you either (a) have an exam at the same date and time as our final exam; or (b) if you have 3 final exams including ours in a 25-hour period.  Those are the only ways to qualify.  If you do qualify under one of these terms, and you wish to sit for our Make-Up Final Exam, then please fill out this form today.  Note that filling out the form does not qualify you to sit for the final -- that only happens once you have email from us with explicit permission.

112 Puzzle Hunt!
It's this weekend!  Look here for more details soon!

Toyz Nation Gaming League (TNGL) event
I've been asked by some recent 112 alums to advertise this event to you.  Sounds fun!
Carpe diem!

David

Reminder: TP Mentor Sign-Up form due by 6pm today! (lottery is tonight)
Hi all.  Here's a reminder:

TP Mentor Sign-Up Form, required, due by 6pm today
Everyone please fill out this form by 6pm today. The TP Mentor Lottery will happen right after that (tonight) so no late form submissions can be accepted (if you do not fill out the form, you will receive a random assignment). While we cannot guarantee everyone will get one of their top choices, we'll do our best! Good luck!
 
So far, about half of you have filled out the form.  I'm hoping 95% or more get it filled out by 6pm tonight.  Let's hope.
 
Thanks.

David

TP Mentor Sign-Up Form (due 6pm tomorrow), my OH Tue->Mon/1-3pm, Kinects to loan
Hi all.  Here are today's announcements:
 
TP Mentor Sign-Up Form, required, due by 6pm 3-Apr (tomorrow)
Everyone please fill out this form by 6pm tomorrow (Sun 3-Apr.) The TP Mentor Lottery will happen right after that (Sunday night) so no late form submissions can be accepted (if you do not fill out the form, you will receive a random assignment). While we cannot guarantee everyone will get one of their top choices, we'll do our best! Good luck!
My OH moved from Tue to Mon 1-3pm
As noted.  I may be just a couple minutes late (I'll be coming from volunteering to teach an APCS class in a suburban area, but hopefully I'll be on time).

Kinects to loan
We still have some Kinects to loan if you wish to borrow one.  If so, please stop by my OH to pick it up.  Note that we no longer have Surface Pros to loan (sorry).

Carpe diem.
 
David

hw10 solutions today, no 4:30pm recitation, topics not on midterm2
Hi all.  Here are today's announcements:
 
Recitation today in quiz labs
Instead of quizzes, today we will cover solutions to hw10.

4:30pm recitation is canceled
Following on Dean Casalegno's email regarding the Community Gathering memorial event today at 4:30pm, we will cancel the 4:30pm recitations today.  Anyone in those recitations can attend any other recitation today instead.

Topics not on midterm2 or final
The following topics were either skipped or mostly-skipped, and so you can safely skip them when preparing for midterm2 or the final:
    Recursive Math
    radixSort
    Keyword args (**kwargs)
    Non-local variables fail on setting (use nonlocal)
    Functions that return functions (in closures)
    Function decorators
 
Carpe diem.

David

hw10 due never, ML talk reprise, Kinect+SurfacePro loaners, and more
Hi all.  Here are some announcements:
 
Prof Ada and I are available to meet
If you wish to speak with us, for whatever reason, we are always available.  Please take us up on this offer.  

Hw10 is due never
Hw10 will not be submitted, and so has no due date.  We will review solutions perhaps in class today, and definitely in recitation tomorrow, and perhaps again as well in review sessions after that.  So you are responsible for the material, but you do not have to submit the hw.

Hw7 and hw8 grades
Hw8 grades are now posted.  Note that each hw had two parts, but we combined them into one part so these hw's were not double-weighted.  The other part was moved to the "etc" category so we have a history of your submissions, but the grades and comments are all in the "hw" category part.  If you have any concerns or questions about this, please contact Anqi (acong) or Prof Ada or me.

Machine Learning reprise today, 5-6pm, DH 2315
We heard that there were more people trying to attend the CA-led Machine Learning talk than there was space available, and so:  we will have an optional Machine Learning reprise talk today, 5-6pm, in DH 2315.

Kinect and Surface Pro request form
Some of you may wish to borrow a Kinect for your term projects.  Since using a Kinect requires Windows, and some of you cannot get Windows via BootCamp working on your Macs for whatever reason, you may also wish to borrow a Surface Pro for your term project.  We have 18 Kinects to loan and 6 Surface Pros to loan.  If we get more requests, we'll have to share them in some way.  In any case, if you are interested, please fill out this optional form today to request to borrow either a Kinect or a Surface Pro.
Carpe diem.
 
David

Follow-on to President Suresh's email
By now, we presume you have read President Suresh's email regarding Elliott Glasgow's tragic passing. Our hearts go out to all of Elliott's friends, family, and acquaintances. We understand that this can be a very trying time for you. You should know that there are many resources here to help you manage your way through these times. We very much encourage you to reach out to other people -- friends, classmates, RA's, Housefellows, your advisors, CAPS counselors, and others (as well as your parents, siblings, friends, clergy, ...). Let's form a community of support, and grieve and heal together. We are all one community, and we are all here for each other. In particular, you should know that we the 112 faculty are here for you. We can talk to you any time of day or night, whether about this or about anything else. If you have concerns, we are here for you. If you wish or need to speak with us, just let us know. We are here for you.

Also, as President Suresh noted in his email, the university has numerous resources available to you. In particular, there are professional counselors at CAPS who are trained specifically to help you manage these kinds of situations. If you are feeling very stressed or otherwise struggling to manage these issues, please do not hesitate to call CAPS at 412-268-2922 and they will give you prompt support while respecting your privacy.

Also, in light of these events, there will not be a quiz this week, and tonight's review session is canceled. Also, if you need the time and would prefer not to attend lecture tomorrow, for this or any other reason, we understand. Same goes for Friday's recitation. If you do not attend tomorrow or Friday, we encourage you to use that time to reach out to people who can help support you, even as you perhaps also support them.

We further understand that healing is a process, and it will take some time. If you need more time to manage this, please come speak with us and we will help however we can, with extensions or other such accommodations as appropriate.

Again, we are all part of one community, and we should all work together to support each other in these times.

David and Anil

Reminder: Semi-Optional (semi-required) CA-led lectures start tonight!
Hi all.  The dates/times/locations/topics are on our course schedule (and include a couple minor changes, so please double-check them).  Attend as many as you wish, but attend at least one.  To get credit, be on time, stay the whole time, and pay good attention.  The usual "Do The Right Thing" stuff.
 
The CA's have worked very hard to prepare these lectures.  I think you're really going to enjoy them.
 
Have fun!
 
David

Required attendance at CA "optional" lectures this week
Hi all.  As Rohan noted in @2735, the CA's will be leading a series of lectures this week on a bunch of really interesting topics.
 
While you may optionally attend as many as you wish, you must attend at least one.  This is to give you a bit of exposure to some interesting CS topics (as this is technically not just a course on coding, but also more generally on Computer Science).
 
The CA's have worked very hard to prepare a great lecture series, and I think you will really enjoy and benefit from them.  I hope so, at least!
 
In any case, please plan on attending at least one of them.  The list of days, times, and topics are all included in our course schedule.
 
Enjoy!
 
David

hint: iterative fasterIsPrime is ok to use for hw9!
:-)

No os.walk for files, no strings for numbers (like RTP)
Hi all.  To be clear, you may not use os.walk or anything similar on hw9 or, more generally, when a problem (say on a midterm or final) says you have to use recursion meaningfully.  os.walk is a great function that handles the recursive descent through a file system for you.  But that defeats the whole point of these questions, which is for you to do the recursion yourself.  So:  no os.walk.
 
Also, as always, you may not use strings to solve inherently numeric problems such as findRTP.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Kinect Workshop, quiz9 scores, hw9 autograder, DS_Store files, waitlists, and more!
Lo and a mirthful Saturday to all!  And now the mots du jour:
 
Today is the Microsoft Kinect Workshop!
Starting soon!  Have fun!

quiz9 scores
The CA's once again (as always) had same-day grading of the quizzes (thanks, CA's!), and the results were....  Magnificent!!!  The median was a whopping 92, and there were 8 perfect 105's.  Woohoo!!!!  Great job, everyone!!!

hw9 autograder is posted
Good luck!

Getting rid of DS_Store files
Be sure you read the important hint here about DS_Store files!  Then download and run removeDsStore.py to get rid of those pesky DS_Store files.

Waitlists
While we cleared our waitlists long ago, a few of you somehow wound up in some netherworld, not on a waitlist and neither enrolled, but thinking you were on our waitlist.  We're not sure how that happened, but we have to resolve it asap.  If you think you are waitlisted, then if you've not done so already, you need to contact me, and also contact Nicole Stenger (nstenger@cs.cmu.edu).  At this point, Nicole cannot get you off the waitlist -- you'll need help from your advisor and/or Dean to do that.  But we are happy to help how we can, and in any case, if you've been participating fully in the course, you should get enrolled without too much of a problem even now.  In any case, don't dally, take care of this today!

Keep up the Peer Tutoring!
We heard strong positives about peer tutoring as folks prepared for midterm1. Well, midterm2 is right around the corner.  We strongly encourage you to keep meeting in your peer tutoring pairs, so everyone gets as well-prepared as possible for midterm2.

How to fail the course in one easy weekend! (Don't game the hackathon!)
This is a not-super-happy item, but...  It was overheard that a small group of students were thinking about attending the 112 hackathon expressly to get the 2-day extension on hw10, then to use (well, abuse) the hackathon time to do their 112 hw and perhaps other courses' hw, and then slap together a lame hackathon project at the last second to make it appear that they were actually doing the hackathon all along.  This idea really saddens me.  It runs so counter to everything we do here, everything CMU stands for, everything you came here for.  Ugh.  And know that if you do that, you will fail the course and face more serious consequences besides.  Please don't do that.

On the General Goodness of People
So...  While I am deeply saddened when people think and act in such deceitful and antisocial ways, I keep my perspective and I am deeply heartened by the knowledge that those are aberrations.  I look at all of you and I see the goodness of people, people who care, people who try hard to advance themselves and to improve the world they live in.  The world we all live in.  So, yes, there are some liars and cheaters and even worse among us -- and we must find them and hold them accountable so that they do not destroy our social structures.  But they are few and we are many.  The world is a good place full of good people, as so many of you are.  A few miscreants will not change that fact.

Carpe diem!

David

Be careful with mutable default arguments!
Hi all.  This is an important safety hint!  You should not use mutable default arguments unless you thoroughly understand how they work.  The problem is that Python will only ever create a single default value, and reuse that value.  To see the problem, check this out:
 
def f(x, a=[]):
    a.append(x)
    return a

print(f(2)) # [2], as expected
print(f(3)) # [2,3], ugh!  It kept the old default list!
print(f(4)) # [2,3,4], sadness!
 
One way around this is to use None as the default and then assign a new value inside the function in that case, like so:
 
def f(x, a=None):
    if (a == None): a = [ ]
    a.append(x)
    return a

print(f(2)) # [2], as expected
print(f(3)) # [3], as expected
print(f(4)) # [4], as expected
 
That's better!
 
David

hw9, thanks, quiz9x, and more
Hi all.  As we march along now, the semester rapidly picks up speed.  In a blink, the last hw will be completed, then another blink and the second midterm is done, then one more blink and it's summer.  Almost there...
 
Also, I should note what a joy it is working with all of you, and especially now, when so many of you are coming into your own, seeing the fruits of your considerable labors, gaining the skills and confidence to undertake clever and ambitious term projects (and so far your projects are showing great promise!).  I commend all of you for your hard work and great results, and I love seeing it all happen.  So, thanks for that.  :-)
 
Meanwhile, some quotidian items for the here-and-now:
 
Hw9 is posted
Due Sunday, as usual.  Have fun!

Thanks for your great feedback!
Thanks to all of you for your extremely thoughtful and insightful feedback, both regarding the course and the CA's.  As for the course, we are making some large changes for the fall semester, strongly informed by your feedback.  We hope to reduce time-on-task by up to 5 hours per week in the fall while also hoping to not reduce outcomes (or not too much).  Your ideas were invaluable in forming this goal as well as our plan as to how to achieve it.

But what about *this* semester?
Indeed, we will institute some changes now, in fact today!  Today's recitation will be a new format -- a lab, where the CA's first discuss a problem for 5 or 10 minutes or so, and then you get to work in teams of two on that problem.  The problem, getCourse(), is straight out of hw9, so this should give you a big jump on that problem and thereby reduce the time on task for hw9, hopefully by a lot.  We also dropped radixSort and function decorators from this week's content, and the decorator question from hw9.  These are the kinds of changes we anticipate for the fall, and we hope they help now!  We'll make some similar changes next week.

A bit more about hw9 collaboration
To be clear:  the only collaboration allowed on hw9 is today, during recitation, and then only on getCourse.  Even then, do not electronically share code (email, etc).  But you can look at each other's getCourse during recitation (in teams of two), and co-write it at that time.  So we understand and expect that your getCourse solutions will be quite similar to each other's.  After recitation, though, it's back to normal SOLO hw's.

Quiz9x on Friday
We have a midterm upcoming, so we need an X quiz this week and next week to help everyone properly prepare.  Please plan accordingly.
 
"Affection is responsible for nine-tenths of whatever solid and durable happiness there is in our lives." C. S. Lewis
 
"Never permit a dichotomy to rule your life, a dichotomy in which you hate what you do so you can have pleasure in your spare time. Look for a situation in which your work will give you as much happiness as your spare time." Pablo Picasso
 
"Some cause happiness wherever they go; others whenever they go." Oscar Wilde
Carpe diem!

David


CA reviews (last call), grades, Kinects, jobs, kittens, musicals, pentiums, and more!
Hi all.  Just a few announcements today...
 
Last call for CA Reviews
We have received 300+ CA reviews, which is really helpful (thanks!!!), but we have 400+ students and many who did respond did so multiple times, so perhaps up to half of you have not yet responded.  Please do so today!  Today is the last day we will ask for your feedback, which we very much wish to have.  So, if you've not done so yet, please fill out this form today.  Now would be ideal!  Thanks!

CA Review form
In case you missed it, here is the form to review CA's.  :-)

Hw7 and quiz8 grades are posted
As usual, please see Anqi if you have any grading concerns. 

Be sure to keep solo solo!
Some students were observed over-collaborating on the solo portion of hw8 (ugh).  Please be sure not to do that.  You may not look at other students' code, and you may not show them your code.  This is for your benefit, to be sure that you learn how to code, how to debug, and how to problem solve on your own.  And of course, you are never on your own, because we are always here to help!

Prep for Kinect Workshop
For those of you planning to attend the (truly wonderful) upcoming Microsoft Kinect Workshop for 112 students, you should please follow the instructions in @2547 to get all the required software installed and properly setup.  That can take a while, with some Very Large Downloads (TM), so please do this well ahead of time.

Summer Internship (Mobile dev at the Carnegie Museums)
A recent CMU alum and former 15112 student who now works down the street at the Carnegie Museums' Innovation Studio as a Creative Technologist sent me this.  It sounds like a fine local summer opportunity with a social-good aspect to it.  While most of you probably don't have mobile dev skills yet, some of you probably do, so perhaps this may be of interest to some of you:

The Innovation Studio is currently looking for a part-time paid mobile development intern for over the summer.   Here is the full job description and application. (fyi- It is way more mobile app focussed than this description let's on)

Form to review CA's
Here you go!

Amazing video of unbelievably cute kittens
Check it out here!

Happy Birthday, Andrew LLoyd Webber!
See here (or countless other such lists).

Happy Birthday, Pentium!
The first Intel Pentium was produced 23 years ago today, back in 1993.  This is before Amazon and Google and Facebook etc, and even before Microsoft really took off with Windows 95 and Office 95.  The Pentium was a critical advance, bringing the relatively inexpensive but powerful personal computer to a level that allowed for all those companies to emerge.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Hw8 autograder
Hi all.  The hw8b autograder is now public.  Note that hw8a does not have an autograder.
 
Good luck with it!
 
David
 
PS: Still need lots more CA Reviews.  Please help!

Please review your CA's! And the course!
Hi all.  We very much need more CA reviews.  Your opinion counts!  And we really want/need to hear it!
 
Please take a moment to do this.  We very much appreciate it!
 
Optional CA Review Forms (please fill these out today!)
Please fill out this form once for each CA you wish to review.  Thanks!

Optional Course Review Forms (and please fill these out today, too!)
Please fill out this form, too, to give us feedback on the course.  Thanks!
 
Thanks again!
 
David

CA and Course Reviews, Erik's "quizzer", Greek Sing
Hi all.  I hope you are enjoying this splendidly sunny Friday morning!  And now a few announcements:
 
Optional CA Review Forms (please fill these out today!)
We constantly strive to improve the learning experience for current and future 112 students.  To that end, please fill out this form once for each CA you wish to review.   We very much welcome and encourage your constructive feedback.  Thanks!

Optional Course Review Forms (and please fill these out today, too!)
Please fill out this form, too, to give us feedback on the course.  While we of course support the FCE system, and we very much look forward to and carefully consider your comments there, we also ask for your comments at this point, mid-semester, so we have a chance to take them into account during this semester as well as in future semesters.  Your input is invaluable. You can be sure we will take your constructive comments to heart.  Thanks!

Erik's optional "quizzer" (please give it a try today, too!)
Former CA Erik Pintar has created this online practice tool for this week's recursion material.  It is optional, and quick (just a few minutes, probably).  Please give it a whirl, and if you do, please fill out this quick form afterwards so Erik knows how he can improve the experience.  Thanks!

Greek Sing extensions
Reminder:  as with any other major performances and competitions and such, those of you who are investing a lot of time this week to participate in a Greek Sing performance can get a short extension on hw8.  Email Prof Ada or myself if this applies to you.

Happy Birthdays!
Happy birthday to Rimsky-Korsakov (composer of serious works and fun ones!), and to B.J. Wilson, drummer for Procol Harum, a one-hit-wonder band that produced the entrancing Whiter Shade of Pale. Enjoy.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Multi-machine == webapps (roughly) [so attend tonight, if possibly interested!]
Hi all.  Just a few of you are thinking about true webapps, but many are thinking about maybe doing something with multiple players on multiple machines.
 
There are various ways to do this (say, sockets with tornado as one), but the easiest way is probably to use a webapp.
 
You say "webapp"?  There's no browser!
 
Yes, that's still fine.  You can have "fat" Python clients use your webserver, and that's a relatively straightforward way to get your program working on multiple machines.
 
The point is:  if this at all may sort of interests you, you should attend Rohan's optional talk tonight (well, the reprise is tonight).  That's where he'll teach you just what you need to know to do this!
 
Hope this helps.

Carpe diem.

David

hw8 and lots of tp stuff
Hi all.  Spring officially begins in 90 hours.  Almost there...  Meanwhile, some late-winter announcements du jour:
 
hw8
We will use the same hw8 as last semester, available here, due this Sunday at 10pm as usual.  For technical reasons, I am unable to post to the course website probably until tomorrow (sorry), but this is what will be posted then.

Webapps + TP's
If you have any possible interest in doing a webapp or a distributed multiplayer program for your term project (TP), then you should definitely attend Rohan's optional lecture tonight.  It's super helpful in that regard.

Kinects + TP's
If you have any possible interest in using a Kinect (which is awesome, btw) for your term projects, then you should definitely attend Microsoft's Kinect Workshop, a week from Saturday.  This is designed and co-led by Andre Sutanto, former 112 Head CA now at Microsoft, and is designed specifically for 112 students.  Cool.  More info will be posted here soon.

Python2 + TP's (and importing from the future!)
Some of you may want to try to use modules that might require Python2 rather than Python3.  No problem, that's fine.  To do that, though, you'll have to get used to writing Python2, which has a few (though just a few) important differences from Python3.  For example, 5/2 is 2 in Python2 and 2.5 in Python3.  That is, / in Python2 acts like // in Python3.  Also, print in Python2 is a statement, and in Python3 it is a function.  Ugh.

But there is a cool way around this, so that you can basically write Python3 code in Python2.  You can import from the future.  Read about it here.  Basically, at the top of your Python2 file, just include this code:

from __future__ import (absolute_import, division, print_function, unicode_literals)
from builtins import *
After that, you can basically write Python3 (at least as much as we've learned so far) and it should mostly work as you'd hope.  Good luck with it.

Mobile Apps (iOS and Android) + TP's
Some of you may wish to write mobile apps (iOS or Android) for your term projects.  Our basic advice is: don't do it.  Sorry.  These are complicated and require lots of technical details that don't really showcase your programming skill.  You'll get caught up in learning lots of things just to get a basic Hello World app working.  It's generally not worth it.  That said, you can try if you want, just be prepared to go in a different direction if you don't make rapid progress.

Other Languages (Java, C#, etc) + TP's
Some of you may wish to use another language than Python for your TP's.  Our basic advice is:  don't do it, unless you already know that language well.  You'll get lost in the details of learning the new language, and lose precious weeks in the process.  That said, you may try if you wish, but:  we will only allow you to use a non-Python language if you meet personally with either Prof Ada or me prior to midterm2 and convince us that you are sufficiently fluent in that other language so that it will not prevent you from successfully completing your term project.  So that means, for most of you, it's Python, though this is hardly a major restriction (consider that probably 95% or more of our term projects have been in Python, including a great many awesome projects).

A fine use of stackoverflow
Now here is a truly fine use of stackoverflow.  Enjoy.  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David

Welcome back!
Hi all.  I hope you enjoyed a lovely and restorative spring break!
 
And now, ready or not, here we go:  15-112 is now officially back in business, full steam ahead!

We are entering a critical part of the course.  For the next 4 weeks, you have to:  stay current with the more-challenging material each week (and recursion and OOP are indeed more challenging topics), prepare for the upcoming midterm, and prepare for the upcoming term project (we'll discuss the TP more in lecture this week, but the key is to get started now, if you have not done so already!).  In addition, some of you also need to backfill any areas from weeks 1-8 that need improvement.  Lots of moving parts, but if you keep them all moving forward, then you'll be in a great position after midterm2.
 
A long week off of 15-112 and CMU was just what we all needed.  But now we all need to get back into the flow right away.  Today, for example, is a great day to come to my OH and/or Prof Ada's OH to discuss your term projects and/or this week's material.  And it's a wonderful day to go to the CA's evening OH -- the queue will be joyously short.
 
"Happiness lies in the joy of achievement and the thrill of creative effort." Franklin D. Roosevelt
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Course (mostly) shutdown for spring break
Hi again.  Last post from me for a while. :-)
 
We are now shutting down the course for spring break.  However, some of you have asked that we keep piazza going over break to support your term project work.  Some CA's have very kindly offered to do just that, so we will provide this support as best we can (thanks, CA's!).  But please understand that it's just a few CA's, and they will check perhaps once a day at most, so rather than the usual 3-minute turnaround time, more like a 1-to-2-day turnaround time should be expected.
 
And...  We still very much encourage you to take a full break, at least for 4 or 5 days.  Sleep in, exercise more, socialize more, laze at the beach more, read more books, watch more movies, play more quidditch.  Get yourself spiritually far away from 112 and from CMU.
 
We just completed an intense 8 weeks.  We have an even-more-intense 8 weeks just ahead of us.   You have come a long way and achieved much.  You deserve -- and need -- some solace now.
 
Take your very-well-earned break!
 
As for myself, I will be 100% offline for the entire spring break.  The same is true for many CA's, so please plan accordingly.  During that time, though, Prof Ada will be available via email for any course-related matters (thanks, Anil!).
 
I've very much enjoyed working with all of you so far, and I also know the best is yet to come.  I can't wait.  With that...  See and talk to you in a while.
 
Have a lovely and safe and fun spring break.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Midterm and midsemester grades
Hi again.  The CA's did their usual awesome job and finished grading last night (thanks, CA's!!!).  And the results were notably better than quiz7x, so kudos for all your hard work this past week!
 
The raw median was 77, and we added +5 points so the adjusted median is 82.  The adjusted scores are the ones in autolab.
 
This is a solid performance, though also leaves some room for growth.  In particular, your Free Response scores were nice, but we could work more on Code Tracing, and maybe work even more on Reasoning Over Code, Big-Oh, and Short Answers.
 
With that said, your results definitely show that you have made great strides over the past 8 weeks, and that you are emerging coders and problem solvers.  Woohoo!!!!
 
As for midsemester grades, the median is a high B, and that is a bit inflated, chiefly because we don't have the second midterm or final.  That will probably drop a couple of points (but just a couple of points) at the semester.  Still, it's a strong showing.  Kudos!!!
 
Grades will hopefully appear in SIO later today, but perhaps not until Monday.
 
Carpe diem.

David

SURG/SURF grants
Hi all.  Please see the following message regarding SURG/SURF grants.  This is a nice opportunity for some of you.  Good luck with it!
 
David

My OH today (1pm-3pm) (and good luck!)
Hi all.  Please note that my OH today will run from 1pm to 3pm.
 
And...  Good luck on the midterm today!

Carpe diem.
 
David

Testing for hw7 (important, please read)
Hi all. There's been some confusion and conflicting advice apparently over what is required for testing in animations like Tetris and Dots-and-Boxes.
 
This post will clear up all that confusion henceforth.
 
In general (not hw7, but for everything after hw7), you do not have to test graphics drawing functions (redrawAll), and you do not have to test event handlers (init, timerFired, mousePressed, keyPressed), but you do have to test everything else. This would include all functions that are "model-only" -- those that take data and manipulate it in some way.
 
However...
 
In hw7, this being the deadline date, and as there was some conflicting advice provided, we will not require ANY testing.
 
However...
 
For those of you who did testing for hw7 (and woohoo, good for you, truly!), we will provide up to +2 points of bonus for that testing, which feels like a suitable reward for code well written.
 
Again, starting the day after hw7 is due, all future animations on hw's and on your term projects require appropriate testing as described above.
 
In any case, we hope you agree that this is the fairest way to handle the current situation.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Hw7 hints'n'at, hw6 grades, DNA Tic-Tac-Toe, 'n'at
Hi all.  I hope you are enjoying this absolutely radiant late-winter day (though a 61-degree sunny day is hardly winter-like -- thanks, El Nino!).  And now a word from our sponsors:
 
How to pass parameters from play to init
Many of you are ignoring the rows,cols passed into play and then hard-coding them in init.  This is not ok.  You have to pass them into init (or just set them in run).  To do this, have your play function provide the extra values as extra parameters to your run function.  Then, inside run, once you create the data struct, you can right there and then initialize those values into data.xyz fields.  Or, if you prefer, just pass the values from run to init, and do it there, as normal.

How to test functions that take data as a parameter
To test functions that take data as a parameter, you need to create a "fake" data struct instance, as such:
def testPlaceFallingPiece():
    print("Testing placeFallingPiece()...", end="")
    class Struct(object): pass
    data = Struct()
    data.xyz = 42 # initialize data as needed here
    placeFallingPiece(data)
    assert(data.xyz == 42) # test data as needed here
    print("Passed!")
Tetris "More Ideas" are not for hw7 bonus
While it says the word "bonus" somewhere on that page, things like hard drops, pauses, and splash screens and such are not for hw7 bonus.  You are busy enough now without those distractions (even though, sure, they are cool and would be nice...).

Hw6 grades are posted
Folks did very well on hw6.  Kudos!

DNA double-helix structure discovered 63 years ago today
In 1953, scientists James D. Watson and Francis H.C. Crick announced they had discovered the double-helix structure of DNA.  How does that relate to computing? Very much so.  Besides obvious things like DNA sequencing, which is heavily computational, there's a more direct connection with using DNA directly as a computer (no kidding).  They've even created DNA that can play Tic-Tac-Toe.  Amazing.
 
Carpe diem!

David
 
PS: "'n'at" is a Pittsburgh-ese term that means "and so forth". 

Quiz7x grades, peer tutoring, hw7 submissions, ...
Hi all.  I hope Tetris and Dots-and-Boxes are going well for you.  Here are some important announcements regarding quiz7x and prepping for the midterm:
 
Quiz7x is graded
Thanks, CA's!

Quiz7x grades....  leave room for growth...
I recently noted that this semester's performance is on par with previous semesters.  That was true until yesterday, where the results show that we now have some work to do -- and this despite the quiz being very similar to the practice quizzes and the problems we covered in class the day before.

The raw median was 49.5, which indeed is lower than we would hope.  We added +10.5 to everyone's score, to drive the adjusted median up to 60, which is the score entered in autolab.  Top adjusted score is an even 100 (nice job). 

Again, these results mean we all have work to do, and right away, before the midterm.

Recall that quiz7x is an excellent predictor of what you will score on the midterm, unless you do something about it over the next 5 days.  So this should get your attention and help you focus on studying (just as soon as you complete hw7, though doing hw7 itself is indeed a form of studying for the midterm, since animations nearly certainly will be on it in some prominent way).

Midterm Prep Plan
The CA's manage midterm prep (again, thanks, CA's!!!).  They will post the midterm prep plan here soon.  You are very strongly encouraged to do all you reasonably can to properly prepare for the midterm.  You should be able to quickly and easily reproduce any example (or any variant of them) from the notes, the quiz-practices, the hw-practices, the quizzes, or the hws.  You also need to practice code tracing, especially with aliases.  You might practice big-oh problems and reasoning-over-code problems, too.  But focus on the code first.  Be sure you can code.  In any case, the CA's will post the plan here soon.

Hw7 submissions
Don't forget that you have two separate files to submit -- Tetris goes into hw7-collab-tetris and Dots-and-Boxes goes into hw7-solo.  Both are due tomorrow, and it's probably not a great idea to use a Grace Day or Late Day this week, seeing as you really have to start focusing on the midterm.

More Peer Tutoring
I hope the quiz7x results would motivate more of you to sign up for peer tutoring.  Please don't sign up to consume peer tutoring if you have a 97.  I admire your pluck, but really, this is not for that.  But for the many of you with quiz7x scores well below par, peer tutoring is another great resource for you to consume.  And of course, for those of you with stronger scores (on quiz7x, that might be 75+), we welcome you as providers of tutoring!  Anyhow, here is the optional form.

Still chin up!
Even with the lower quiz7x result, things are still net positive.  You have learned a lot!  But you definitely as a group need to study more, and quickly, to get properly prepared for the midterm.  You can do it!  And we are here to help!  Good luck!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Quiz+exam hints, chin up, hw7 note, hw7 grading
Hi all.  A few announcements on this snowy morn:
 
Quiz7x and midterm and final exam hints (go where the points are)
As noted in class, you might do well to go after the most points-per-minute first.  And for most people, that's FR (free response).  In any case, do not dally, and do not lose 20 minutes to CT.  We are testing for fluency.  If you are not fluent on a problem, you will lose time (perhaps a lot of it).  The issue is not a lack of time for the quiz, but a lack of fluency in the quiz-taker.  The fix of course is to practice, practice, practice and gain fluency.  But that's a long-term fix.  During the quiz or exam, the "fix" is to move on to the problems you can quickly solve, then double back to the ones that will take more time.

Another quiz+exam hint (brief means brief!)
If a problem statement says to be "very brief", you should definitely follow that advice!  Just a few words, or perhaps a well-labeled picture, would be fine.  Do not lose precious time writing long paragraphs in such cases.  You'll not gain any points, but you will lose lots of time.

Chin up!
While X quiz grades are not as high as you might wish, they are improving, and they are just fine by historic measures.  That is to say, all your hard work is indeed paying off, and you are learning this better and better each week, gaining that fluency in coding and problem-solving that we all seek.  So keep your chins up, keep your morale high, and give it your best, and you'll be fine, even if today's X quiz is not your very best result.  Keep at it.

hw7: Dots and Boxes "legal moves"
The problem statement says that you need to indicate "where the legal moves are".  That language was added when we were restricting moves to be connected to prior moves.  But we lifted that restriction (since the Wikipedia page does not have that restriction), making every move between two adjacent and not-yet-connected dots a legal move.  This makes it moot and silly to indicate "where the legal moves are".  So you can ignore that part of the spec (or not, it's fine to do anything reasonable there).

hw7 grading after spring break
The CA's need to invest their time helping you best prepare for the midterm, and then in grading the midterm.  And so: hw7 will be graded after spring break.  This also means that hw7 grades will not be included in your mid-semester grade calculations.  Of course, hw7 grades will be included as normal in your semester grade calculations.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Form groups for Tetris at OH tonight (starting at 6pm!)
Hi all.  We super-highly recommend that you work in teams on Tetris.  If you are not in a team, and you want to be in a team, go to OH tonight (starting at 6pm) and let the CA"s know, and they will help you form a team.
 
Again, this is a VERY good idea.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Peer tutoring redux, practice-quiz7x, and more!
Hi all.  Here are some announcements for this soggy morning:
 
Peer tutoring update
34 of you now are consuming peer tutoring, which is a great start, but 37 more peer tutors are available (thanks, peer tutors!).  I am 100% certain that more of you could benefit by signing up and using this service.  Here is the optional form.

Practice-quiz7x
Here are the practice materials that the CA's used at last night's review session:
     quiz7x-prep.pdf
Hope it helps...

Possible Internship opportunity
I have been asked to forward this to you.  I have no connection with or knowledge about this company, and do not endorse it, but this may or may not be of interest to some of you:
From: Jeff Ong <jeff.ong@frogdesign.com>
Frog design?s technology group is visiting CMU this Thursday and Friday (2/25 2/26). We?re looking for computer science students with interested in design, for an internship specifically. For examples of our work and to learn more, visit http://frogdesign.com.

If interested, please stop by our booth (#D01) at the CAOC Career Fair: 
Thursday, 2/25, 2:30-6pm, Wiegand Gymnasium, 1st Floor of Cohon University Center

You may also send your resume / portfolio to jeffrey.ong@frogdesign.com and ahmad.saeed@frogdesign.com.
Best
- Jeff
Happy Birthday, George!
On this day in 1943, Beatles lead guitarist George Harrison (one of the top rock guitarists ever according to Rolling Stone) was born in Liverpool, England.  He wrote this, and this, and this, and this, and...  
 
"With our love, we could save the world."
    George Harrison
 
David

hw7 is now posted
Hi all.  Sorry if this is a duplicate post -- piazza seemed to simply eat my previous one (ugh).
 
Hw7 is now posted.  It includes Tetris (of course!), which is collaborative.  You are not technically required to work with someone else on Tetris, but we very much encourage you to do so!
 
Hw7 also includes Dot and Boxes, a fun problem with some interesting data structure choices for you to make.  Enjoy!
 
We deferred sidescrolling and splash screens and such to a later hw, probably the next one (after spring break). 
 
Enjoy!
 
David

Peer Tutoring update (slots available!)
Hi all.  A few things about peer tutoring:
 
More tutoring is available!
We had more people generously sign up to provide tutoring than those who signed up to consume it, so at this time, we have room for more people to sign up to receive peer tutoring.

So...  Sign up!
Here is the optional form.  Consumers and providers are all invited!

Tutor teams assigned (look to your email for assignments)
For the 24 of you with grades below 90 who requested to consume tutoring, and the 24 matching tutors, you will soon receive email from me listing who is on your tutoring team.   That email will also list the days/times that you listed when you are generally available.  Every pair has at least two such times that match, so you should be able to find good times to meet.  Please contact each other asap and set up your first meeting time.  Again, this has to always be in a public space.  Please contact me if you have any questions or concerns.  And have fun!

Carpe diem.
 
David

Optional lecture today, 4:30-6:30pm, WEH 5414
Hi again.  One last post...
 
We have a fun optional lecture today, 4:30-6:30pm, in WEH 5414.

We'll cover:
 
Optional: How to Build a CPU + Assembly Programming
 
Optional: QuickSort, HeapSort, RadixSort
 
Fun times!!!  Hope to see some of you there!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Even more on peer tutoring
Sorry for the spam...
 
Reviewing the gradebook, I think it'd be ok to sign up to consume peer tutoring if your grade was in the low to mid 80's.
 
David

More on peer tutoring
Hi all.  Some of you are signing up to consume peer tutoring (rather than provide it) even though you have grades in the mid-to-high 90's.  That's great that you want to learn more, but this is not really what peer tutoring is for.
 
The goal of peer tutoring is for students who are doing well so far to provide some extra help for those who need it.

There is more to this than grades, but to reduce it to grades:
 
If you have a 90 or higher, you should provide peer tutoring.

If you have a 79 or lower, you should consume peer tutoring.

If your grade is in the 80's, you probably should neither provide nor consume peer tutoring.
 
These are rough guides, and we will not strictly enforce them, but hopefully that helps you better understand the goals of this effort.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Peer tutoring sign-ups and more
Hi all.  With midterm1 just over 200 hours away, it's time to start getting serious about prepping for it.  To that end...
 
Optional Peer-Tutor Sign-Up Form (optionally fill it out today!)
Peer tutoring is a great way for you to get more tutoring help, or for you to offer that help (and the best way to learn something is to teach it -- just ask the CA's!).

Please fill out this optional form if you wish either (a) to provide peer tutoring services (to be a peer tutor); or (b) to consume peer-tutoring services (to be helped by a peer tutor).

Note that anyone who signs up will be expected to meet at least twice weekly for at least 1/2 hour each time, starting this week, running for at least the next 2 weeks of the course. That is a minimum expectation. Individual tutors/tutees will arrange meeting times and frequencies among themselves.

Also note that all peer tutoring meetings must take place in public spaces, such as the Citadel Commons or GHC 3rd floor Cafe, or a library, etc.

More Intensive CA Tutoring
For those of you who are most struggling (near the bottom decile), we will provide some additional intensive tutoring over the next couple of weeks (and perhaps beyond).  This is in addition to peer tutoring, which you should sign up for.  You do not sign up for this extra CA tutoring -- a CA will contact you directly soon if you qualify.

My OH Today
Please note that my OH today will run until 1:45pm (ending 15 minutes early).  Thanks.

# of X quizzes
Rumor has it that some folks are saying we have way more X quizzes this semester than last semester.  Untrue!  After 6 weeks last semester, we had 2 X quizzes.  So far this semester, we've had 2 X quizzes.  Those are notably similar numbers.

# of quizzes
Rumor also has it that some folks (maybe the same folks?) are saying we have way more quizzes this semester than last semester.  Untrue!  We only changed how we number them.  When we have an X quiz, we split the Friday quiz into two separate quizzes.  We could have called it the same quiz with two separate parts.  That would "reduce" the number of quizzes.  The way we do it now "increases" the number of quizzes.  Of course, none of that is true.  You have one quiz session a week, regardless of how we number them.

PACE Volunteer Appreciation Day (Thu 25-Feb)
I've been asked to post this, and while it is not a 112 thing, it hopefully is of interest to many of you:
Service. Philanthropy. Education. Activism. 
Are you involved in any of these?
PACE is hosting our annual Volunteer Appreciation Day on Thursday, February 25th from 10-4 in Wean Commons.
Wear your volunteer shirts, rep your service org(s) and have your photo taken for a free cookie and hot chocolate! Celebrate the difference you make and tell us how your heart is in the service. Like our event on Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/events/531556380345795/

Happy Birthday, Handel!
Today in 1685, composer George Frideric Handel was born.  You might listen to his lovely Water Music or his Arrival of the Queen of Sheba or numerous other popular pieces.  Delightful, and very good cerebral music to do 112 to!  Enjoy!
 
Carpe diem.

David

Whew! Respite! Quiz7x, hw5, fonts, humor and more!
Hi all.  I imagine you are fast asleep now, but hope you arise soon to a lovely Monday morning!  And now, a few announcements:
 
Whew!
While just over 100 of you are apparently planning to use a grace/late day, most of you have completed hw6 (with 281 of you scoring 65/65, and 327 of you scoring at least a B so far on the autograded portion).  Nice work!  Hw6 was a serious piece of work, among the 2 or 3 largest and perhaps hardest homeworks we will face all semester.  You should be rightly proud of your collective effort in finishing it!

A respite is around the corner...
Hw7 will probably be lighter in some regards than hw6 (plus, as usual, Tetris is collaborative).  And then there is no hw during midterm week (so you can study!), and then no hw again during spring break (so you can not-study!).  So you are soon to have some very well-earned R&R.  And then after spring break, there are only 3 more hw's all semester!  We are getting there..

Quiz7x is Friday, not Tuesday
Please note that quiz7x will not be Tuesday, but rather will be on our normal quiz date, this Friday.  Also, students who were excused from quiz6x last Friday still have to take quiz7x this Friday, so be sure to study well for it.  Anything up to and including week6 material and hw6 may be covered on quiz7x.

Hw5 grades are released
As usual, any grading questions or concerns should be emailed to Anqi (acong).

How to list all the fonts available
We received this question recently: how can you tell all the fonts you can use in tkinter. Here you go:
# list all tkinter fonts
import tkinter, tkinter.font
root = tkinter.Tk()
for fontFamily in sorted(tkinter.font.families()):
    print(fontFamily) That said, please use very common fonts in your hw's, so that our CA's can see what you saw when you ran it.

Recitation and lecture decorum
Please be on time, not late, and please do not use phones or computers.  This is for all lectures and recitations, and also for large-group and small-group sessions.  Thanks.

xkcd humor for programmers
Here are some xkcd's that Google says coders would enjoy:
http://xkcd.com/859/
http://xkcd.com/292/
http://xkcd.com/138/
http://xkcd.com/371/
http://xkcd.com/974/
http://xkcd.com/953/
http://xkcd.com/761/ 
http://xkcd.com/737/ 
http://xkcd.com/518/ 
http://xkcd.com/505/
http://xkcd.com/399/
 
Carpe diem.

David
 Autolab hw6 occasional weirdness --> 5 extra submissions
Hi all.  For reasons that are beyond our control, Autolab is occasionally failing to autograde your hw6 submissions.  Ugh.  When this happens, you'll get an error like this:
 
An error occurred while parsing the autoresult returned by the Autograder.

Error message: 795: unexpected token at ': *** No targets specified and no makefile found.  Stop.'

Autograder [Sun Feb 21 13:00:27 2016]: Received job 15112-s16_hw6_3_koz@andrew.cmu.edu:872
Autograder [Sun Feb 21 13:00:38 2016]: Error: Copy in to VM failed (status=1)
Autograder [Sun Feb 21 13:00:38 2016]: Here is the output from the autograder:
---
Autodriver: Job exited with status 2
make: *** No targets specified and no makefile found.  Stop.

Score for this problem: 0.0

Graded by: 
 
Fortunately, this does not happen that often, maybe on 1% of submissions.  We have "fixed" this simply by regrading or just resubmitting the errant submission, and so far that has worked each time.

We have reported this to the Autolab team.  Hopefully, they will fix it.
 
Meanwhile, to accommodate this weirdness, everyone now has double the number of submissions, up from 5 to 10.  Given that this weirdness seemingly happens infrequently, those extra 5 submissions should be more than enough to compensate for this.
 
Again, we'll work with the Autolab team to get this fixed asap.  Meanwhile, again, sorry for the confusion.
 
Carpe diem.

hw6 autograder is released
Sorry this wasn't announced a bit earlier.

Good luck with it.

David

hw6, quiz6, quiz7x, and more
Hi all.  Some announcements for this entirely lovely spring-like Saturday morning:
 
hw6 pretty version posted
Hw6 has been posted since Wednesday, but now the nicely-formattted version is out there, too.  :-)

One tiny change to hw6
The only change is that your fancy wheels can/should be 600x600 instead of 400x400.  That said, we'll accept anything 400x400 or larger, but it will look nicer if you make it larger.

Quiz6 is graded
The CA's did a great job, as always, with same-day turnaround.  Wow!

Quiz6 problem with #1
As many of you noticed, there was a problem with #1 on yesterday's quiz.  To solve it, you needed to know about ord('A').  This was due to a last-minute edit, which introduced this bug.  Sorry for the confusion.  But our mistake is your gain!  Why?  Because we computed your grade twice -- once normally, then again where we converted #1 into a bonus problem.  Your score is the larger of those two computations.  We feel this is a fair and reasonable way to handle this, so nobody is particularly penalized for working on #1, and those who solved it still get some credit for it.  Plus, as we dropped the X quiz from yesterday (whew), the quiz was long enough to give plenty of time for the other problems even if you worked hard on #1.  So, again, sorry for the confusion, but this seems like a fair way to manage the issue so most everyone actually benefits from it.

Quiz7x is next week
As previously announced, we'll have an X quiz on Tuesday.  It will be renumbered so it is quiz7x, as it is in week7.  It will cover everything up to and including week6 and hw6.

Know your MVC rules
To do hw6 well, you really need to understand MVC.  In particular:
Never draw in a controller (init, mousePressed, keyPressed, timerFired), and
Never change data.xyz in your view (redrawAll)

Limits on style losses on bonus
Some of you rightly expressed concern that you might wind up with negative points by trying a bonus and losing style points for it.  While we definitely will grade your bonus for style, if it turns out that you lose more points than you gained on the bonus, you can take this to Anqi and she will happily refund the extra.   Thus, there is no chance of losing points by doing bonus.

Non-Ascii Characters!
Some of you are including some non-ascii characters in your code, particularly in your comments.  The autograder is especially sensitive to this, and simply crashes with a cryptic error message.  So it is best to avoid that and just not use any non-ascii characters.

Disappearing code (backup!)
Others have said that sublime or iep has basically eaten their code, so the file went completely blank.  Ugh!  We don't give extensions in this case (sorry), so your best defense is to backup your code.  Often.
 
Carpe diem!

David

quiz6 today, quiz6x on Tuesday
Hi all.  It turns out that the time required for quiz6 + quiz6x exceeds the 50 minutes available per quiz lab today.  So:  today, we'll only take quiz6.  Then, Tuesday in lecture, we'll take quiz6x.  So now you have extra time to prep for the X quiz.  :-)
 
Again, still attend today's quiz labs, as quiz6 will be administered there.
 
Carpe diem.

David

My OH --> Tomorrow
Hi all.  Please note that I have to move my OH from today to tomorrow, still noon to 2pm.
 
See some of you then!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw6 pre-release
Hi all.  For those of you wishing to get a jump on hw6 tonight, note that hw6 #1-3 will be identical to problems #1-3 from here.
 
We'll add more problems tomorrow, covering animations, which we'll cover in class tomorrow.
 
Have fun!
 
David

How to test a destructive function
Hi all.  We've seen many posts asking how to test a destructive function, since you can't generally do anything interesting with its return value (since it's usually None, and even if not, it still doesn't return the modified list, which you must test).
 
So, here is an example of a destructive function along with a simple test of that function, which hopefully makes clear how in general to do this:
 
def removeFirstIfOdd(a):
    # destructively remove first element from a if it is odd
    if (a[0] % 2 == 1):
        a.pop(0)

def testRemoveFirstIfOdd():
    print("Testing removeFirstIfOdd()...", end="")
    # test a list that starts with an odd
    a = [1,2,3]
    removeFirstIfOdd(a)
    assert(a == [2,3])
    # and test a list that starts with an even
    a = [2,3,4]
    removeFirstIfOdd(a)
    assert(a == [2,3,4])
    print("Passed!")

testRemoveFirstIfOdd()
 
Hope this helps.
 
David

Your mergesort variants must be destructive
Hi all.  There appears to have been some confusion over @1256.  It said: "your functions must be non-destructive unless the problem statement explicitly says otherwise."
 
For the mergesort variants (with one aux and three-way), your functions must work like the mergesort in the notes, which is destructive and which returns nothing (technically, None).
 
So your mergesort variants (with one aux and three-way) must both be destructive and return nothing (again, technically None).
 
If you made them non-destructive, you should change them.  Fortunately, this is not very difficult to do.
 
We have also provided an extra submission to everyone for this purpose (though of course you can use it for any purpose).
 
I hope this clarifies the matter.
 
Good luck wrapping up hw5.
 
David

Use the right hw5, be non-destructive, maybe do gymnastics and policy advocacy
Hi all.  For a short time, the course website errantly contained the correct hw5 link and also a mistakenly-posted link to last semester's hw5.  Whoops.  The aberrant second hw5 link was promptly removed, but to be sure, please check that you are in fact doing the hw5 from this semester.  (There was some overlap in problems between the two of them, so be sure you are sure when you check.)  Sorry for the confusion.
 
Also...
 
Remember that your functions must be non-destructive unless the problem statement explicitly says otherwise.  In friendsOfFriends, for example, you may not destroy the incoming dictionary.
 
******  End of required reading *********

*********************************************************************************

******  Start of non-required reading *******
 
And now a couple non-112 things that may interest you and that do involve some 112 students:
 
First, are you interested in competitive gymnastics, or know someone who is?  If so, contact Chay Gruber (cgruber) (or have your gymnastically-inclined friends contact him).  He's a current 112 student (who can do standing backflips, in my office!) and he is interested in forming (or joining) a CMU Club Gymnastics Team, maybe joining and competing in the NAIGC.  Fun times!
 
Second, are you interested in government, policy, and advocacy?  If so, here is a message  (actually, excerpts from a few messages) that may interest you from current 112 student Victor Tavarez:
 
I am writing to you to see if you could help me advertise Roosevelt@CMU, a new organization I am a part of on campus. We are trying to recruit new members this semester.

The Roosevelt@CMU is a non-partisan, student led, policy think tank, providing students with a national network and resources to develop and implement policy ideas at the campus, local, state and national levels. Roosevelt@CMU engages students in the political process with a national network and resources. Students gain experience in policy writing and advocacy. 

The organization is nonpartisan, so we are welcoming of ideas across the spectrum.  Debate is always needed for a healthy democracy to prosper.

For more information, see <a href="http://rooseveltinstitute.org/rooseveltchapters/" target="_blank">here</a>, or contact Shivanee Shah (shshah), or find us on the Bridge.
 
Love to see some of you getting out there and carpe'ing some diem this way!
 
Carpe diem.

David
 
Read posts, watch videos, don't cheat, attend sessions, and do hw5
Hi all.  Some announcements for this lovely if not entirely balmy Saturday morning:
 
Please read our posts
We continue to see lots of piazza posts made by students who simply do not read what we post here.  Sigh.

And watch the videos in the notes
Many other questions are easily and directly answered by the short and helpful videos in the notes.  So:  watch them!  They are short.  And helpful.

Two more cheating cases  :-(
We are now processing cheating cases #2 and #3 of the semester, with students facing serious consequences.  Let's try really hard to not have any more cheating.  It's possible to not cheat.  Just don't do it.  It's so totally not worth it, and with our super-powerful plagiarism detection tool we use, the odds of getting caught are so high.  So, please, don't cheat.

Do not submit hw's before the autograder is released
See @331 #1.

Hw5 autograder is now released
Have fun.

Attend sessions you sign up for
Some of you continue to sign up for sessions and then not attend them.  If this continues, we will have to police this, which I really don't want to do.  Basically, if you are so rude as to blow off your CA's and to take seats that other students would have taken, then you will lose the privilege of attending these sessions.  Come on, folks, just do the right thing, and if you sign up, show up.

Great Insights in Computer Science music video
For some fun, watch this.  See how many references you can understand now.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

quiz4, quiz4x, hw5
Hi all.  A few quick items here:
 
quiz4 and quiz4x grades are posted
The quiz4 scores were super-high (median of 95) and the quiz4x scores were not (median of 57).  So the combined median was around 76, which is about right.  Even so, note that the X quizzes are indicators of your readiness for the upcoming midterm.  And the X quizzes are indicating that, as usual for this point in the course, nearly all of you could use plenty of additional practice on prior material.

Don't panic over low X quiz scores
With a median of 57, that means many of you will see some rather low scores on quiz4x.  If that's you, don't panic.  Just fix it.  Study earlier material more, practice all the practice problems in the notes, do more code tracing.  Simply practice, practice, practice.  This week in particular may be a tad less intense, and a great chance to shore up the previous 4 weeks.
Hw5 is released
We'll cover some important hw5-related material tomorrow in lecture and again Friday in lab/recitation, but you may be able to get a jump on it tonight.  Enjoy!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

No recitation tomorrow, no quizzes this week, and more!
Hi all.  Here are a few announcements for your Tuesday night reading pleasure:
 
No recitation tomorrow!
Enjoy the day off!

Still meet on Friday, but no quizzes this week!
You still should attend your lab on Friday, but instead of quizzes, we'll have recitations then, covering material that will help you with hw5.  So: no quizzes this week.  Woohoo.  :-)

If you did not fill out the required poll...
(or: how to avoid getting your autolab account locked!)
If you did not fill out the poll mentioned in @1058 #5, in a fit of clemency, you may have one very last chance today to do so.  Tomorrow, anyone who has not filled out the poll will finally face actual real consequences.  The point here is in no way to punish anyone.  The point is to get you to Do The Right Thing, to read these posts, and to adhere to the required portions therein.  It's all to help you, after all.  Anyhow, this is the last call....

hw3 style grades
These are posted, and as we said would happen, nearly everyone lost nearly every style point.  That's ok on hw3, but now you have to start improving on this front.  So read your graders' comments, and take them to heart, and start improving your style with hw5 (since hw4 is over now, and most of you will again lose most of the style points there as well).

Use good style as you go, do not just add it afterwards!
I've written about this before here, so I'll just leave it at that.

Congrats to TartanHacks winners
Several teams with 112 students and CA's won a variety of prizes at TartanHacks.  Cool!  And congrats!!!!!

Reminder: regular exercise is the best way to combat stress
In addition to getting enough sleep, nothing beats stress as well as regular exercise.  And I don't mean hours and hours of intense workouts.  15 minutes of anything that makes you sweat and you're set.  It's truly amazing how a short workout just drinks up those stress hormones and helps reset your psyche.  Find time for a short workout every day if at all possible (and it is!).
 
Carpe diem.

David

Link to the poll
It sure would help if I posted that, right?  Sigh...
 
Here is the link to the required poll mentioned in the previous post.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Sunday's announcements (required reading)
Hi all.  As with all our posts, this is required reading.   I hope hw4 is clicking along for you!  Here are a few announcements that may help:
 
Do not use non-ascii characters!
Some of you included non-ascii characters in your code.  In one case, it was a non-ascii character in a comment.  in another, it was an ellipsis ("...") as a single-character in test functions.  In any case, if you have even a single non-asciii character in your code, the autograder will fail, and it will not even say why (bummer).  So avoid non-ascii characters!

Read these posts!
It is clear that many of you do read them, but equally clear that many do not.  But they are required, and we will start verifying from time to time that people are reading these.  This post is one of those times (see below).

Graphics test functions
You do not need test functions for graphics functions.  Your eyes are your test functions in those cases.  But if you use a non-graphics helper function for a graphics function, then you do need a test function for that helper function.

How to set up drawCirclePattern (and runSimpleTortoiseProgram)
When we covered drawing in the notes and in lecture, we used two functions:  runDrawing (which sets up the window and the canvas before the drawing, and then displays them after the drawing), and draw (which is called by runDrawing, and does the actual drawing in the canvas).  For drawCirclePattern, you'll want to create two functions.  The first, called drawCirclePattern, only takes on parameter, n, and will look suspiciously similar to our runDrawing function in the notes.  In that function, instead of calling "draw", you might rename that something like "drawCirclePatternHelper" or some such, and you will pass it canvas, width, and height, as in the notes, but also n.  That second function does the actual drawing.  This same pattern will repeat itself for runSimpleTortoiseProgram.

Required version-info poll (Due by Sun 7-Feb @ 10pm, but maybe just do it now)
It has come to our attention that some of you are still running the wrong version of Python, which is leading to all kinds of unwanted issues.  To help us confirm that everyone is using Python3, and further to help us confirm that everyone is reading these posts carefully, everyone in the course is required to fill out this form by Sun 7-Feb @ 10pm (but why wait? now is a great time to fill out the form!).  Those who do not fill out the form will lose points on hw4.

Keep your balance
If you put all the time you have into hw4, then stop.  Really.  Go to the solution session on Wed or Thu night and see how we might solve the problems you did not complete.  That's fine.

Nate Silver has Carolina on the Rise
According to this, famed statistician Nate Silver used all his computer modeling prowess to conclude that Carolina will probably defeat Denver in tonight's Super Bowl.  Btw, I didn't know this, but Carolina on the Rise is the official song of the Carolina Panthers (see here).  What does this have to do with 112?  The song, not much.  The computer modeling, lots.  Enjoy the game!

Carpe diem.

David

Consulting for Social Good - International Work Experience Opportunity
Hi all.  This is not a 112 thing, but it is a fabulous opportunity to the wider CMU community, and may well be of interest to 112 students:

X marks the spot, and more!
Hi all.  According to Punxsutawney Phil, spring is not far away.  So enjoy the cold while you can!  And now, a few words from our sponsor:
 
The value of X quizzes
To be clear: the X quizzes represent the rigor and pace that will be on the midterms and the final.  So the X quizzes are truly invaluable, serving the crucial role of helping you see if you are at that level.  Some of you are, many are not (yet).  If you are not yet there, heed the X quiz results and practice, practice, practice.

Historical view of X quizzes
So you know: prior to last semester, what we now call an "X quiz" is simply what we used to call a "quiz".  There were no other kinds.  So the gentler non-X quizzes you now get, the ones that inflate nearly all your grades, are new and kinder/gentler.  So that's nice.  But the old X quizzes still have to be used, so we are sure that you properly prepare for the midterms and final.  Because history suggests that at least the first several X quizzes have low medians, as students adjust to the high expectation of fluency on the core material.  You can do it!!!

20/20 format does not affect your total time per quiz
There's some confusion that the 20/20 format gives you less time for X quizzes.  Untrue.  Historically, these are 20 minutes, just like now.  True, you have to prepare well and then move quickly in those 20 minutes, but this is the same standard as always.  History suggests you'll nearly all be up to that standard soon.  Just keep at it.  In any case, the 20/20 format has nothing to do with how much time you get on each quiz.

Classic 112 Error: "I didn't have time for good style"
Some of you reported that you did not have time to use good style on hw3.  This is bass ackwards:  you don't have time to not use good style!  Using good style may indeed require some very small amount of time, but...  It for sure drives down your bug count, and for the bugs you do have, it also for sure makes it easier to find and fix those bugs.  And since debugging takes a huge amount of time (way, way more than using good style), this means that using good style is a huge time savings!!!!  So you don't have time not to use good style!

Only place autograded code above the #ignore_rest line
Do not place anything besides the autograded code above the #ignore_rest line.  So, for example, place all your test code below that line.  And also place all your manually-graded solutions below that line.  This includes the tkinter import!  If you import tkinter above the line, the autograder (which does not have tkinter installed) will simply crash and you'll score 0 on that submission.  The only code that goes above the #ignore_rest line is the code the autograder needs to do its autograding.

CA's regularly staff Faculty OH
So you know:  generally, when Prof Ada or I have OH, we also have a CA there to help out.  This way, while you wait in the queue, you can get help with all matters 112-related, get some tutoring or practice CT or maybe do some hw practice problems.  All good things!  This is just another resource for you to use.  So:  use it!!!  :-)
 
Carpe diem.

David

APT Puzzle Tournament (Feb 27th)
Hi all.  This is optional but may be of interest to some or many of you:
 
APT (Applied Predictive Technologies), a long-time supporter of 15-112, is hosting its semi-annual APT Puzzle Tournament.  This is largely designed by former 112 CA's who now work at APT.  While the event is for the whole CMU community, they have assured me that 112 students can definitely participate in and enjoy the event, and are encouraged to participate.  Hence this post.

TartanHacks, quiz4, hw4, and more
 
Hi all.  Here are some announcements du jour:
 
TartanHacks plan
For those of you doing TartanHacks, you should still take quiz4 and quiz4x on Friday, however:  Rohan will soon post a form here, and those who respond to confirm they are doing TartanHacks will get a 2-day extension on hw4.  Anyone doing so needs to show their CA?s a 5-second demo (literally, 5-seconds) of their TartanHacks project at next week?s recitations.  And: Good luck!!

15-110 xfer
We are nearly at the last possible date to xfer to 15-110?.

hw4 posted + hw4 autograder is live
Use your submissions judiciously!

Please make your piazza posts private
Thanks!

Comments + char/line limits
To reiterate: comments do count towards 80 chars/line, but comments do not count towards 20 lines/function.

25 lines for graphics functions
Graphics functions get 25 lines, rather than 20.

No graphics on quiz4
Even though we will cover graphics tomorrow, and they are on hw4, they are not on quiz4.

Optional lecture reprise 
Tonight at 7pm in PH A20.  Great topics!  Enjoy!!!

Python 3.3 in autograder
So you know:  while most of you are using Python 3.4 or Python 3.5, the autograder is using Python 3.3.  This should not be a problem, and most of you would never detect the difference, but you still should know.

There is no tenth announcement
Or is there?
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

As you wrap up hw3... (Grace Days, Late Days, hw AMG, and perspective)
Hi all.  This is for everyone, not just those who are still wrapping up hw3, but indeed it is with them especially in mind right now.
 
First, remember that a Grace Day is entirely free, no penalty.  You don't sign up, either.  You just submit after the deadline, up to 24 hours late, at no penalty.  Sweet.
 
And if you run out of Grace Days, then you get up to one Late Day (not combinable with a Grace Day) per hw, at the nominal deduction of 10 points.  It's not much, and it can very much relieve stress.  While you probably should not use it every week, it's not a problem to use it once in a while.  So use it, when needed, to manage your time and your stress.
 
Next, there's this:  Homework AMG.  For anyone scoring below 50% of the points available on the autograded portion of any hw, we will manually regrade your submission and award partial credit up to that 50% of available points.  We call this "hw AMG" grading ("Alternative Minimum Grading").  You do not sign up.  If you qualify, we do it, and you get the higher of regular and AMG grading automatically.   In fact, we did AMG grading for hw1 and hw2 and some of you saw your scores increase by up to 40 points!
 
Finally, there's this:  keep your perspective and keep your balance.
 
Do not invest more than, say, 15 hours or so into a hw (and most hw's should require less than that for most of you!).  At some point, just stop, enough is enough.  Submit what you have, then go to our solution sessions to see how we would solve the parts you did not fully complete. 
 
Also: while it is great how much you collectively care about your learning and your outcomes, no hw is worth getting way stressed over, or getting hugely sleep-deprived, or neglecting friends and hobbies and other courses.  Really.
 
So while you definitely have to try hard in this course (no kidding), you do not have to try heroically hard, too hard, unsustainably hard.
 
And there's also this:  semester AMG.  No matter what your grade is, even after the first midterm, even if it is a low failing grade at that time, no matter what, you can still earn a passing grade of a C by semester's end.  Of course, everyone wants an A or a B, but it should be reassuring to know that everyone can pass this course regardless of how they are doing right now or in the near future.  Just keep trying hard and you'll be fine.
 
And this:  the CA's are incredibly devoted to helping you.  So please accept and use their help!  Prof Ada and I are equally devoted, and we would love to help you how we can.
 
So:  keep your balance, don't stress, just do the best you can, use your resources wisely, and you'll be fine.
 
Lots of people struggle at this point in the course.  And nearly all of them do just fine, thank you very much, by the end of the course.  This semester will follow that pattern.  You will be fine.
 
And, as always, we are here to help.

Carpe diem!
 
David

"Please debug my code" --> OH, not piazza (and some general debugging hints)
Hi all.  As is typical for hw3, which has some greater challenges than hw1 and hw2, we are seeing an increase in posts to piazza where students basically post a large wall of code and ask "where is my bug"?  (Sometimes, they don't even ask, they just post the code!)
 
While we very much strive to help you, we will not find your bugs for you, and we will not provide much if any help to those piazza posts.
 
Finding your bugs would not help you, but instead would be a great disservice to you!  Since everyone who writes code also writes bugs, it is crucial for you to develop the skills to find and fix your own bugs.  On your own.
 
We are happy to help you learn how to find your bugs, though.  However, even that is not really a piazza thing, but more of an in-person OH thing.  Piazza is great for specific questions, like:  I think this test case is wrong, or what does this question mean, or why is 2%10 equal to 2?  Specific questions with specific answers.
 
The question of "how do I debug my code" is just too open-ended for piazza.  It requires in-person help at OH for us to walk you through the process.
 
That said, here are some general debugging hints:
 
Write thorough test functions
This is totally worth your time!  Test functions help you find bugs.  They are great!

Find the smallest possible test case that causes the bug
When you have a bug, you often have to basically code trace your way through the buggy test case, which can take forever.  You can make things go WAY faster if you find the smallest possible test case that causes the bug.  Really, try to pare it down as much as you can.  Sometimes, you'll get down to a tiny test case where you can then immediately simply see the bug's cause.

Only run the buggy test case
Sometimes we see students running tons of test cases, culminating in the buggy test case.  But then there's all this extra output, and all the time lost running cases that you know work.  Nah.  When chasing a bug, only run the one buggy test case in isolation.

Print out lots of variables
When you run that one-and-only super-small isolated buggy test case, add lots of print statements, printing out lots of variable values.  Then, very carefully, line by line, check those values, until you find one that surprises you.  That usually takes you right to the bug.

Be slow and steady, Be methodical
Don't rush bug hunting.  Slow and steady wins the race.  But also be methodical.  Do not just stare at your code, and definitely do not just make random changes to your code hoping to magically fix the bug.  That's not methodical.  That's just wasting time.  Be sure you follow a methodology, as listed above, that slowly, methodically converges on your bug.
 
And then, if this does not work, come seek help at OH.  We are here to help you.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Quiz3x results, Don't Panic about Quiz3x results, and more
Hi all.  The winter sun is beaming, go get your Vitamin D!  Some ponderables:
 
Quiz3 and Quiz3x results
The CA's once again had same-day turnaround, this time on nearly 900 quizzes (wow, great job, CA's!!!).  And the results were... Mixed, but mostly quite positive.  The quiz3 median is 97, which is rock-solid, of course.  The quiz3x median is 80, which actually is even more impressive, though with a long tail, which I'll address in a moment.  In any case, kudos on your fine collective efforts!  Here is a distribution of quiz3x grades:


Why have "X" quizzes?
The X quizzes are crucial.  The non-x quizzes are not really quizzes in any traditional sense, since we give you the answers beforehand.  So, chiefly, they are to promote better studying habits, leading into the hw's.  And they work!!!  Once we added non-x quizzes to the course, time-on-task and stress levels immediately went down, and yet exam scores also went up!  Sweet!  However...  You still need "real" quizzes, where we do not pre-publish answers, and where we ask more rigorous questions, more aligned with the rigor on the midterm and final exam, and also more aligned with the exit criteria of the course.  The only way you can be sure you are ready for the exams is if you are ready for the X quizzes.  So they serve a crucial purpose.

What to do if you have a low (possibly very low) score on quiz3x?
First, look at that distribution again, and you'll see that you are not alone.  Around 128 students "failed" quiz3x, with a score below 60.  I put "failed" in quotes, though, since really quiz3x served its purpose very much for those students, and if you are in that group, quiz3x can in fact help you do better, learn more, and get a higher grade in this course.  Why?  Because now you know where you need work.  So:  work on it!   Practice, practice, practice.   You can go to old CT's and change the numbers a little, and voila, you have new CT's!  You can look at old problems from previous semesters (just adjust them from Python2 to Python3, not a big deal).  You can meet with CA's at OH and in small-group sessions and, again, practice, practice, practice.  One exit criterion of the course is that you are fluent in basic Python usage, and further that you are equally fluent at intermediate-level problem-solving with Python.  The X quizzes specifically promote and require that level of fluency.  And fluency is achieved in one way:  practice, practice, practice.

Don't panic!
Some of you may now be seeing the kinds of low scores you are unaccustomed to.  Don't panic.  This is ok.  Really.  Of course, don't ignore the scores.  Take them to heart, and work with Prof Ada, with me, and with your CA's to improve your learning and your outcomes, while managing your stress levels.  You can do it, and we are here to help.  But understand that many students struggle in this course, especially starting around now and lasting sometimes for a while.  And those students do just fine in the end, as will you. Just keep in the game, keep trying hard, learn as much as you can, and you will be fine.  Really.

Python rounding
Some of you have noticed some weird behavior in Python3 regarding rounding.  Consider:  round(12.5) evaluates to 12, not 13. You are right, it's weird.   But it's not broken, just weird.  It turns out that there are different ways you can round, and the world does not entirely agree on which one is "correct".  In Python2, "if two multiples are equally close, rounding is done away from 0".  This is how most of us were taught in grade school, so most of us (myself included) are more comfortable with that definition.  By contrast, in Python3, "if two multiples are equally close, rounding is done toward the even choice (so, for example, both round(0.5) and round(-0.5) are 0, and round(1.5) is 2)."  Yuck.

So how should you deal with Python3?s broken rounding?
You shouldn?t, since it?s not broken, just different from what you are used to.  When we ask for rounding, just use Python3?s builtin round function, and you?ll be fine.

How to round up (like Python2) in Python3
But what if you really, really want to round like Python2 in Python3 (say, when we don?t require a particular way to round, or on future non-112 projects of yours).  We don't require this, but in case you want to do it, here you go:

from decimal import *
def myRound(f, mode=ROUND_UP):
    # See https://docs.python.org/3/library/decimal.html#rounding-modes
    # mode can be: 
    # ROUND_CEILING, ROUND_DOWN, ROUND_FLOOR, ROUND_HALF_DOWN,
    # ROUND_HALF_EVEN, ROUND_HALF_UP, ROUND_UP, ROUND_05UP
    getcontext().rounding = mode
    return int(Decimal(f).quantize(1))
print(myRound(12.5))
print(myRound(-12.5)
So, again: when asked to round, unless we explicitly say otherwise, you should use Python3's builtin round, and get round-to-even.  But if we leave the choice to you, then you may prefer to use myRound, which rounds up, which many people find more intuitive, or actually lets you round in any of 8 different ways!

Use at least 3 test cases
Many of you have asked how many test cases you need for any given test function.  The real answer is:  as many as necessary.  But many of you still want a hard number, so:  3.  There you go.  3.  You need at least 3 well-chosen test cases for each test function.  Even so, use more if you need more (if there are more than 3 types of cases, or edge cases).

Test functions also must be <80 characters per line
Everything must be <80 characters per line, including test functions.

Test functions must not be >20 lines
If you need more than that, split them up into multiple test functions:
   def testFoo():
       testFoo1()
       testFoo2()
You might even have better names than testFoo1 and testFoo2, but you get the idea.

Please erase code on whiteboards when you are done!
This is for all of us (students, CA?s, faculty).  Let's please not leave code artifacts lying around on whiteboards, on paper, etc,, so that we might accidentally deprive others of the chance to figure out such things for themselves!  This isn't about cheating, but simply about promoting the most learning possible.  Plus, it's just polite to leave a room how you found it.  Thanks!  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David
 
Fifth Friday?s Felicitous Footnotes
 
Hi all.  Today is the fifth Friday of the year, and hopefully the best one so far for you!  To that end?
 
Read these!  Carefully!
We make a lot of posts, and then with a lot of parts.  True!  But they are mostly really important (ok, one or two may be a tad frivlous, but most are truly important, and in any case, we all need to keep our humor as we traverse this intense path we?re on).  So please read them, entirely, and carefully!

Optional Lecture, Sat 2pm, WEH 5421
Prof Ada will lead this week?s optional lecture this Saturday at 2pm in WEH 5421.  It?s on Theoretical Foundations of CS  (Countability + The Halting Problem + NP-Completeness + more).  This is an amazing talk on incredible topics.  Truly, it is one of my absolute favorites.  And Prof Ada will do it far better than I could.  So go, enjoy, and be amazed!!!

Median is 98!
With hw1, hw2, quiz1, and quiz2 in the books, our overall median now is 98.  That is a testament to all the hard work you have invested so far.  So:  kudos!!!

Isn?t 98 too high?
Yes, 98 is too high.  Beyond showcasing your hard work to date, it also indicates that tougher sledding lies just ahead.  Don?t be discouraged if and when your grades go down a bit.  Just keep trying your hardest, learning as much as you can, using your resources wisely, and keeping your balance (sleep, exercise, other courses, etc).  Grades will eventually stabilize in the mid-to-upper-80?s, which is a fine outcome if and when that happens.  And it will!

Autolab glitch
Autolab suffered a glitch last night from around 10:40pm until maybe 12:40am or so, where it simply did not autograde some (though not all) submissions in that time.  Ugh.  First, we informed the autolab team, and hopefully they?ll figure out what happened and be sure it does not happen again.  Second, I ran the autograder on all the ungraded submissions, so now they are all graded. And third, for anyone who had an ungraded submission that was not their most-recent submission, I simply deleted those submissions so they won?t count against your hw3 submission count.  With that, hopefully, the issue is resolved.

How to handle a future Autolab glitch
Autolab glitches are rare, but not unheard of.  More typically, when a student suspects an autolab error, it turns out to be an error in their code.  Even so, Autolab hiccups do occur, and we are here to help when the do.  If you suspect a problem with Autolab, Don?t Panic!  Be calm!  We?ll help get things fixed asap, and then with no penalty to you or anyone else.  If you are at OH, please alert a nearby CA.  If you are not at OH, please post to piazza, and we?ll get right on it.  If there is a problem, we?ll make whatever adjustments are needed so it has a minimal impact on you (such as deleting errant submissions, as above, or sometimes even adjusting deadlines).  We know that you work very hard on these hw?s, and you absolutely deserve a dependable autograding infrastructure.  We?ll try our best to deliver that to you!

Style on quizzes and tests
We do not grade for style on quizzes or tests.  So go nuts.  That said, good style definitely is rewarded, if indirectly, as it makes it much easier to follow your code, and therefore to award more partial credit in many cases.  So good style is suggested though not required on quizzes and tests.

Quiz3 format
Quiz3 will have two parts.  The first part, quiz3x, will cover material from weeks 1-2.  You will have 20 minutes for this.  After 20 minutes, everyone will start the second part, which is a subset of the material from quiz3-practice.  You?ll have 20 minutes for that part, too.  Good luck!

Quiz3 extended time format
For those who pre-arranged for extended time, given this 20/20 format this week, you?ll be on a 40/40 format.  You should take the first part in one quiz lab, and then the second part in the next quiz lab. Please discuss with the proctors on duty so we?re all on the samge page.  And, again, good luck!

Starting hw3 too early?
Despite our cautions, a few more of you have started hw3 too early, with predictably unfortunate results.  Some were doing hw3 without a clear understanding of string slicing, nor knowing about string methods.  This went very poorly, as they simply wasted their time, time they don?t have to waste!  The goal is not to finish the hw?s as quickly as possible, nor to score the highest grade on the hw?s. The goal is to learn the material well.  The rest follows naturally.  So study the notes, study the quiz-practice, do some hw-practice, and only then start the hw.  Not only will you learn more and learn better, but you?ll save time in the end.  Better learning in less time with less stress.  What a deal!!

hw3: no sorting needed!
Some of you are asking about how you can sort a string, as this would help solve one of the problems in hw3.  But it is not necessary!  There is another way to approach the problem where you do not have to sort at the end, since instead you generate the string in sorted order as you go.  Hmmm?..

Spaces vs Tabs
Some of you asked why we use tabs while editing in lecture, even though our style guide explicitly disallows tabs.  Good question.  We do so because our IDE?s automatically convert tabs into spaces.  Yours should, too.  To verify: simply backspace over a tabbed region.  You should go space-by-space over it.  If instead you jump over the entire region at once, then you have tabs in your code!  Yikes!  In that case, please go to OH asap and we?ll help you get your IDE setup properly.  In any case, remember:  tabs are evil!

Using code from course notes
And some have asked if it?s ok to use code from the course notes.  Yes, so long as (1) you cite it (along with the URL from where you got it), and (2) you can easily and facilely write it yourself.  So it is ok to copy-paste fasterIsPrime from the course notes to save time, but not if you cannot quickly write it yourself!  Also, you do not have to provide test functions for code you use verbatim from the course website.

Hw3 style meetings
Given that hw3 is your first one with style grading, your CA?s will meet with you (briefly) in 1-on-1 meetings early next week to discuss your style.  You should hear from your CA?s soon to schedule these required meetings.  And remember: style really does matter.  It?s not a tax or a burden, but instead a huge time savings!  Truly.  Good style drives down bug counts, and makes it way easier to find and fix what bugs you have.  In the end, the small time you invest to have good style pays itself back many, many times over.  Good style makes for great code, and saves you all the time and stress of debugging bad code.

APT Position
APT (see here) has been a great supporter of 15-112 for a long time, and numerous former 112 students and CA's work there now.  They have asked that we let you know about a Database Analyst position they have available (see here).  This position is also in TartanTrak.  They also offer summer internships, which probably is more relevant to most of you.

Titans of yore
On this day in 1998, a mere 18 years ago, Radio Shack spurned IBM and instead partnered exclusively with Compaq for the computers it sold.  At the time, this was a big deal.  Those were all major players in the PC market back then.  Not any more (Radio Shack is bankrupt, Compaq was eaten by HP, and IBM, while still thriving today, is no longer in the PC market)!!!  This is relevant today in this sense:  I guarantee that many of the biggest players of today will be long forgotten in 18 years, hard as that may be to imagine right now.  This is good news for you!  Many of you will be part of the great new companies that make the awesome new innovations that will drive this change.  Get to it!!!

Carpe diem!

David

My OH moved (tomorrow, 11am-1pm), and a missing phone
Hi all.  Sorry, but I have to move my OH again, now to tomorrow (Friday) from 11am to 1pm.  Also, someone left a phone in lecture1 this morning.  Prof Ada has it now, and you can collect it from him (he'll have it at his lecture, than afterwards at his office hours).
 
Cheers.
 
David

More morning missives (my OH today, my typos, and more)
To misquote Alan Perlis, if you have a list of morning missives with 16 items, you probably missed some.  And so I did:
 
My OH today (2pm to 4pm)
Please note that my OH will run from 2pm to 4pm today.  Thanks.

My typos
You may have noticed what seems like more typos than expected in some of my posts.  You're right!  I am recovering from surgery to correct nerve damage in my right elbow, and as such typing can be a bit challenging at times.  As a result, sometimes I make more typos than usual.  Sorry about that!  :-)

Poll on videos in course notes
Please fill out this optional poll to help us better understand how the videos in the course notes are being used, and how we might improve this resource for you. Thanks!

Perlis's actual quote
Alan Perlis actually said (among his many great quotes): "If you have a procedure with ten parameters, you probably missed some."  What he meant is that if you have so many parameters, you probably have misrepresented your data, and you should add some structure to those values, presumably placing them inside a struct or an object or two.  We haven't learned about such things yet, but we will.  For now, take the quote this way;  think carefully about the style and structure of your code, and don't just slap together anything that works, since that will surely come back to bite you.

Who was Alan Perlis?
Alan Perlis co-founded the CMU CS Department, taught the first CS course at CMU, was the first CS Department Head, and was the first-ever recipient of the Turing Award (basically, the Nobel-Prize-equivalent for Computer Science).


 
Carpe diem!

David

Morning missives on myriad meaningful matters
Hi all.  I hope you are off to a great start on this lovely winter morning!  And to help (well, maybe), here are some morning missives:
 
Optional lecture update
We just updated the schedule.  Prof Ada will take the next 3 weeks, presenting some truly wonderful topics.  Enjoy!!!

Academic Development Walk-In Tutoring
In addition to all the supports we offer, CMU's Academic Development office also provides walk-in tutoring support explicitly for 15-112.  We highly recommend this!  Here are the times and locations:
Monday and Tuesday Evenings in the Mudge Reading Room from 8:30-11:00 p.m.
Tutors: Margaret Stephenson (mnstephe) & Biqi (Rebekah) Zhao (biqiz)
Monday Evenings in the Donner Reading Room from 8:30-11:00 p.m.
Tutor: Yunwen Cai (yunwenc)

Practice for quiz3-week2-portion
Quiz2 had very little from week1.  This week's quiz3 will have a much larger (and perhaps more challenging) portion from week2 (or earlier, since everything we do is comprehensive).  To practice, you might check out this quiz from a year ago.  Note that it is in Python2, so replace / with // and use parentheses when calling print.  But it's a good tool to practice for Friday's quiz, as are the many quizzes from earlier semesters that are all posted online (see top of syllabus for links to those semesters).

Know your studying order of operations!
Do not start the hw before you are comfortable with the hw-practice!
Do not start the hw-practice before you are comfortable with the quiz-practice!
Do not start the quiz-practice before you carefully study the notes!

Seriously, that last item really matters!
We have some students who have already wasted lots of time in hw3.  They are asking questions that show that they should have studied the notes and prepped for quiz3, and by not doing so, all they have done is wasted their precious time.  Seriously, don't do that!  Study the notes first, then the quiz-practice, then the hw-practice, and only then launch into the hw.

Hw1 grades are released
They had been ready for a while, and due to a clerical error on my part they were not released.  Sorry for the delay.

Hw3 released, hw3 >> hw2
Hw3 is published.  It is due Sunday at 10pm.  Enjoy!  Also, note that (as advertised) hw3 may require more time and effort than hw2.  Knowledge is power, so plan accordingly.  Also, remember that you should only give this what time and energy you can reasonably invest into it.  If you can't complete the entire hw, do what you can, then go to the solution session to see how we might solve the problems.

Hw2 solution session is tonight
We had far-too-few people at last night's session.  I hope more attend tonight.  Even if you got a high score on the hw, it is worth attending to see how we might approach solving the same problems.  Plus, in addition to hw solutions, you get quiz and hw prep for the coming week.  Sweet!

Hw3 autograder is released
We released the hw3 autograder early, as an experiment.  We hope this does not lead to overdependence on it as a debugger, which it is not.  You get 8 submissions in any case, and we will not give more submissions if you exhaust those 8!  So please use them wisely.

Extra submissions for late days
After the main deadline, we will add 50% more submissions so even if you exhaust all the original submissions, you still have more submission for the late deadline.

Reminder: style counts for hw3!
Even if your hw3 gets 100/100 from the autograder, you can lose points when the CA's manually grade for style, which they will!  So try to follow our style guide as best you can.  Note that most students lose most of the style points on hw3, but by hw5 or hw6, most only lose a few of those points each week.  Of course, our goal is for everyone to lose no points at all, and to be astonishing paragons of breathtaking style!

Regularly check your autolab grades
Autolab holds the official record of your grades.  And while our CA's are magnificent and meticulous, and so they have a super-low error rate, we also grade many thousands of items, so some errors will occur on occasion.  If you believe there is an error in your autolab grade, please bring it to our attention immediately (email Anqi (acong)).  It is hard to impossible to correct errors months later, and much easier in any case to do so soon after they occur.

Do not self-plagiarize!
For those of you who are repeating the course: you may not copy your own code from a previous semester!  You must solve every problem de novo (from scratch), without looking at your previous work.  This will help you learn the material better, and considering that you are retaking the course, that is surely in your best interests.  The goal is not to finish the hw the fastest.  The goal is to learn the material the best.  So: do it again from scratch.

Do not copy from non-students
Students in our first cheating case of the semester claimed a defense that they were not copying from other students, so it was ok.  No, it was not.  You may not copy solo hw from anyone anywhere at any time, nor may you provide your hw code to anyone anywhere at any time prior to the hw deadline. Period.

Know your string methods!
For example, use c.islower() rather than (c in string.ascii_lowercase).

The Bridge API (this is cool!)
Jake Correa, your Student Government CTO, just announced the release of the Bridge API (an API, or Application Programming Interface, is a way for you to use a service or program from your own code).  This is really cool, and I should think some of you will use this in some way for your term projects, or just for some personal projects you might do.  Here are some notes from Jake's email:
Access to data on Student Orgs and campus events
Build apps for CMU by leveraging Bridge data
Easy to use, quick to apply for access
Apply here: https://stugov.andrew.cmu.edu/bridgeapi/
More information: BridgeAPI_Info_Flyer.pdf
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

Section exchange, 15-xyz interest, don't cheat!, don't stress!, 15-110, and Mac's birthday
Hi all.   Well, we're off and running now, heading into week3.  I hope you are doing well and enjoying the ride so far!  Here are some notes for this lovely Monday morning:
 
Optional Section Exchange sign-up (due today)
Please fill out this optional form today (Mon 25-Jan) if you wish to change sections (for whatever reasons).  The more students who sign up, the more likely it is we can satisfy everyone's requests.  The actual Section Exchange lottery will be done tomorrow (Tue 26-Jan) in the early morning.  We may not be able to satisfy every request, but we'll do our best.

Optional 15-xyz Interest Form (due today, too!)
We are considering adding a new course for next academic year, a follow-on to 15-112 where each week we explore a Big Idea in Computer Science from a programming perspective.  One week we may write a small compiler, another week a web application, and another week we might explore databases, and then perhaps a Turing Machine simulator.  You get the idea.  Please fill out this optional form if you may have interest in taking this 15-xyz course next academic year.  Note that filling out this form is not signing up for the course, just indicating general interest in it.  Thanks!!

Don't cheat!
We are now dealing with our first apparent cheating case of the semester.  We very strongly urge you to make better decisions and not cheat.  We use very powerful tools to detect cheating, and when it is detected, we do not ignore it.  This means that, regardless of the ethical issues involved, cheating simply is a losing proposition -- the huge and likely risks way, way outweigh the meager possible rewards.  So, please, let's make this our first and last cheating incident of the semester.

Keep your stress down, keep your perspective!
While 80% of you scored 100 on hw2, and 90% scored 80-or-higher, that still means that 10% of you did not do so.  And 10% is a sizable group.  So first, understand, if you are struggling, you are not alone.  And we are very much here to help you.  First things first, though:  in the immortal words of Douglas Adams, Don't Panic.  You are fine.  Really.  Next, when we said not to put 25 hours or more into this course any week, we meant it.  Well before then, you should simply stop for that week.  What if you are not done with the hw by then?  Even so, stop.  Just submit what you can, with what time you can reasonably give it, and then...  Come speak with us, so we can help you better manage your time and resources moving forward.  Also, go to the hw solution sessions to see how our CA's might solve those problems.  That will help!  The bottom line is that you definitely do NOT have to solve every problem on every hw.  Untrue.  You simply have to try your hardest, within reason, given the time you have, given that you have other courses and interests, and that you must keep your balance, sleeping, eating, exercising, recreating, and generally living well.

Today is an excellent day to switch to 15-110 (or at least attend a lecture)
You should now have a fairly clear idea of what 15-112 is.  Things are about to step up one last notch, and then we are at cruising speed.  Almost there.  So you can tell if the pace and rigor are for you.  Or, perhaps, if 15-110 is a more suitable course for you this semester.  If 15-110 is a better fit, then today is the day to make the switch.  If you are unsure, then we suggest that you attend a 15-110 lecture today and check it out, see how it feels, see if you might prefer that course at this point.  There is no doubt that some of you will be happier, healthier, and more successful by switching to 15-110 now.  We are also happy to discuss this with you, so please do talk to us if you have any questions or concerns about this.

Utility of the hw's
A stressed student who could not quite complete carrylessMultiply loudly decried how irrelevant it is to them.  Not so!!!  Sure, to be overly focused on that one problem, it is very unlikely that any of you will have to do much carryless multiplication in your lifetime.  Sure.  But...  That problem represents a very broad class of problems involving loops and conditionals.  It is extraordinarily likely that most of you will face exactly these sorts of logical problems, involving precisely the same sorts of problem solving, testing, and debugging that this problem required.  So, sure, carryless multiplying itself is not an important life skill.  But knowing how to code carryless multiplying is!

Happy 32nd Birthday, Mac!
32 years ago yesterday, on Jan 24, 1984, the Macintosh computer was born!  This computer really changed everything, bringing graphics, a mouse, and a more visual way of using a computer to the masses.  It also featured this then-epic commercial, playing off of Orwell's 1984 book, but also taking a very clear stab at the IBM/Microsoft establishment, which in fact was ultimately completely rocked by the long-term consequences of this event.

 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw2 autograder, quiz2 grades, OH move, and more
Hi all.  Well, we didn't get a blizzard, but there's plenty of snow out there.  I sure hope you get in some sledding or some other snow-related fun.  Enjoy!
 
And some announcements:
 
Do not submit to autograder before we announce it is posted
While we test the autograder, it is possible for you at times to submit to it.  This is not good.  In fact, if you do this, you'll just get a 0 with a message instructing you not to do it.  So please don't!  Just wait for us to announce that the autograder is posted.

The hw2 autograder is posted
And there you go.  You have 10 submissions (and just your last submission counts).  Use them wisely.  If you run out of submissions, we will not grant additional submissions.  Instead, you'll have to use a grace day (bummer) and submit it late.

Quiz2 grades
Quiz2 grades are now posted in autolab.  The median was a super-high 97.  Wow.  Quiz2 did not have much from week1.  Future quizzes will have more -- and more challenging -- material from earlier weeks, so we would expect lower medians.  For now, though, woohoo!  :-)

From now on, OH is in GHC 5208, not 5210
The syllabus now reflects this.

Show up if you sign up!
Please be respectful of your CA's time.  If you sign up for a CA-led session, please be sure to show up, on time, ready to learn.  Thanks.

findZeroWithBisection requires a continuous function
In case there was confusion, the findZeroWIthBisection method we learned will only work for continuous functions.

IDE poll results
Looks like about 75% of you are using Sublime, and 20% or so are using IEP, and the rest are using either IDLE or don't yet have an IDE reliably working (yikes).  This seems about right.  Thanks!

IDE setup issues --> OH!!!!
If you do not have an IDE set up so that you can reliably do your 112 hw, you really need to fix this asap.  Today!  Now!  So please run don't walk over to OH and we'll be certain you get everything set up just-so.

Code from optional talk
We had lots of fun at today's optional talk, and produced this code (powerSumFun.py).  It was written very hastily, and is only for pedagogical purposes.  Still, fun times!  :-)

xkcd + import antigravity
In case you don't know (and even if you do!), xkcd is a fun comic strip with many coding references.  For a starter, try this in Python (yes, in Python):
import antigravity
Python is from Monty Python
This is true, the name Python is inspired by Monty Python, which hopefully you have heard of.  If you are curious, check out some famous Monty Python skits at this playlist (caution: this style of humor is definitely not for everyone; if it's not for you, then we suggest you not watch it).

42 is from The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy
We use 42 as a value that means "you have to write this".  It is from The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy.  In the book is that 42 is the answer to Life, the Universe, and Everything.  I don't think we could have a more fitting universal return value.  :-)  Anyhow, you can read more here.  Also, while maybe not everyone may find it funny, I super-highly recommend reading the books.  Enjoy!
 
Carpe diem!

David

Optional Lecture, today, 10:30am
Hi all.  After nearly an hour of heavy shoveling (great cardio!), Gretchen and I have the driveway mostly cleared.  Whew.  Still, to be safe, let's push the optional lecture back a half hour.
 
So the fun will start at 10:30am in WEH 5409.
 
See some of you there!
 
David

IDE use poll (please fill this out today (ideally, now))
Hi all.

To help us better serve you, please take a minute to fill out this short poll on your IDE use.

Note that this was placed in its own separate piazza post since I hoped to use a piazza poll for this, but then learned piazza polls are not nearly so robust as Google polls, so I stuck with the latter.  So future polls can be included as one item in multi-item posts, and sorry for the spam.  :-)
 
Thanks!

And...  Carpe diem!

David

2**4 announcements [or 4**2, 0xA. (ord('Q')-ord('A')), int(math.e**0.5 * math.pi**2), ...]
Hi all.  I hope you are enjoying the snow!  If it must be winter, it might as well snow, and if it must snow, you might as well enjoy it!!!
 
With that, here are some announcements:
 
My OH today (shifted to 2pm to 4pm)
Hope to see you there!

Hw solution session value
Note that the autograder does not grade on elegance, just correctness.  And so, many of you scored 80/80 on hw1 but had, shall we say, not-super-elegant solutions.  So even if you had a perfect score on hw1, you still may benefit from seeing how our CA's might go about solving these same problems!  In any case, hw1 solutions will be covered tonight (as they were last night) in WEH 7500 from 8pm for about an hour or so, after which the focus shifts to quiz2 (which is tomorrow) and then to hw2 prep.

All grading issues --> Anqi
If you have any grading issues, questions, or concerns, your first stop is Anqi (acong).  Our CA"s are fabulous (truly), and their error rate in grading is ridiculously low.  But still, they are human, so errors occur, and we are happy to correct them.  If you think this may apply to you, please contact Anqi.

Which IDE are you using?
The next post will include a poll for us to get a handle on which IDE you are using.  Please participate.  It will be quick.  Thanks!!!

Thonny
Today in class we will show you Thonny, a cool new IDE for novice Python programmers (you!).  It has a truly wonderful feature in how it demonstrates code tracing at the expression and sub-expression level.  Great stuff, and super useful, especially for CT practice.

Section Exchange
Some of you may wish to switch sections.  We will help out.  On Monday, we will have a one-time, entirely-optional section exchange, where we will try to accommodate any and all such requests.  More info will be posted here then.

Waitlist Status
We are now down to just 14 people on our waitlists.  Woohoo!  And we have more than 14 seats available, so there is room for everyone!  Just not yet in the sections you are waitlisted for.  So:  you can sit tight and wait for an opening in your section, or you can move right now into another section that has room and be enrolled today.  If you choose the latter, please contact Nicole Stenger (nstenger@cs.cmu.edu) to arrange it, and please cc me on those emails.

How to include code in piazza posts (hint: not screenshots!)
Please don't use screenshots to include code snippets, as that makes it much harder for us to help you.  Instead, please place your code in a nicely-formatted <code> block (see the "code" button in the edit bar) or, for larger blocks, use Insert/File to add the whole file.

Scratch paper policy
While generally not needed, you may use scratch paper on quizzes and exams, but note these policies:
It must be blank (of course)
You must put your name and andrew id on it
You must submit it and not take it with you
We will not grade it!  We will not even look at it (at least not for grading purposes).  We will just throw it out.  So be sure not to place any final answers on it.  Also, you still have to show your work on the quiz or exam, and not on your scratch paper.  Since we really won't look at it.

Electronics policy
Again, do not use any electronics in lecture, recitation, or quiz labs.  A couple of you are persistently doing so, and may lose the privilege of attending these events.

Autograder policies
Since life does not provide you with autograders (darn!), it is crucial that you not develop an over-dependence on the autograder, which is something we have seen in earlier versions of this course before we took active steps to prevent this.  The autograder should only be a grader, and not a debugger for you.  To that end, we have 2 policies that together help.  First, we limit the number of submissions you have.  At first, it's still quite a few, but over time that decreases.  Eventually, it goes to 0 (on your term project, where there is no autograder).  Second, we release the autograder later in the hw cycle.  The idea is that you should do all your debugging yourself prior to then, and have high confidence in the correctness of your code by the time you submit.  So don't wait for the autograder release to check your code, as that is exactly what we do not want you to do!  Develop good habits.  Test as you go.

What is the #ignore_rest line?
There is a line in your hw.py file that contains #ignore_rest.  The autograder literally ignores everything below that line (or any other line that contains #ignore_rest).  So place everything needed for your solutions above the #ignore_rest line!  Then, place everything else -- including test case, broken code, or anything that is not autograded (as future hw's will have) -- below the #ignore_rest line.

Graded quiz pickup
For those students that didn't pick the quizzes yesterday, we'll have them available for pickup tomorrow by the CA's proctoring your quizzes.

Hackathons are good!
As per @199, hackathons are a fine (and fun!) way to build and reinforce your coding and design skills.  They allow for creativity beyond classroom assignments, and they are a great way to expand your portfolio.  PennApps is one such hackathon, but there are many, including CMU's TartanHacks (signup deadline is soon).  You are all encouraged (though not required, of course) to participate in hackathons, regardless of your coding skills.

2**4 years ago, the world faced the y2k bug
You can read about the y2k bug here.  Basically, many programmers used two digits to represent years.  So, "83" would mean "1983".  That worked great until the century ended, when it failed miserably.  Whoops.

2**7 years ago today, a modern computer precursor was born
As per this site, on January 21, 1888, Babbage's mechanical Analytical Engine passes an initial test of it's design.  Nearly a half-century before electronic computers are built, Charles Babbage designed a somewhat programmable mechanical computer. On this day, a portion of that design was constructed and shown to work as expected. In 2009 a working version of the full design was completed.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Kelly's hints, quiz2, hw2, don't stress
Hi all.  We're well into week2 now, gaining momentum.  Woohoo!  Here are some announcements for this 20th day of the year:
 
Kelly's auto-hint-generating practice problems
As was announced in lecture yesterday, you can now find practice problems related to the course content at https://www.itaptutor.com/cloudcoder . This system is part of a research study that PhD student Kelly Rivers is running. You can find more information (and login data) in the email she'll be sending you today. This system will be available all semester and covers material from basic syntax to maps and sets, as well as recursion.  For more information, please contact Kelly (krivers@andrew.cmu.edu).

quiz2-practice is posted
You will review this in recitation today.  Have fun!

quiz2 is on Friday
It has two parts.  One part covers quiz2-practice, and will be very, very close to that.  The other part covers week1 material, and will not necessarily be exactly or closely matching any particular problem (that is, you should know week1 material well enough by Friday to answer harder CT questions or FR (free response) questions that extend the material in an interesting way).  Your best bet, as always, is to practice, practice, practice.

hw2 is posted, due Sunday
Note that in class we said it would contain carrylessAdd, but we made one more change since then and it also contains carrylessMultiply as a required question rather than an optional question.  This brings the volume and rigor of hw2 more in line with future hw's.

Don't start the hw before you learn the material!
A very easy way to waste tons of time you can't afford to waste is to start the hw prematurely.  Then you are trying to solve problems that require that you apply concepts that you have not fully mastered yet.  That won't go too well.  Instead, first study the notes carefully, then do the quiz practice until you are fluent at it, then move on to some hw practice.  Of course, use piazza and OH to get any and all questions answered in that time.  And then, with your competence and confidence high as a result of your mastery of the quiz and hw practice problems, only then dive into the hw.  You will find that those hours spent upfront on quiz and hw practice will pay back handsomely when you finish the hw faster and with less stress.

Don't stress, just keep trying hard
If things are a blur now, don't stress.  And if a quiz or hw does not go well for you, don't stress.  Just keep trying hard, just keep working with your CA's, keep using your resources wisely (attending lecture and recitation, posting to piazza, going to OH, going to small-group and large-group sessions, etc), and you will be fine.  And don't try too hard.  Put some reasonable cap on the time you put into this course.  If you are putting 25+ hours into the course each week, you should re-evaluate your approach.  In that case, talk to us.  And in any case, don't stress, just work the problem, and let us help you.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Upcoming startup opportunities (including one due today (for those who are interested))
Hi all.  Please see the following note regarding some upcoming startup-related opportunities for CMU students.  The note is from Tom Cortina (Assistant Dean for Undergraduate Education in CS), who asked that we forward it to you.
 
Also note that there is a deadline today for one of these (the McGinnis Competition).
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
 
The importance of practice (quiz+hw) in 15-112
Hi again.  Here is another super-helpful hint on how to succeed in 15-112:  Practice.
 
And then:  practice, practice, practice.
 
You cannot learn this material (at least not nearly well enough) by watching lectures or videos or studying notes.  Those are good things, and helpful (we hope!), but woefully insufficient.  The ONLY way to learn this material is by DOING.
 
If you want to confirm that you can solve a problem, solve it, starting from scratch.  At this point, you are all expected to be able to quickly solve all 26 problems that were included in quiz1-practice, hw1-practice, and hw1.  Any of these, or any variant of these, can appear on any future quiz or exam, including quiz2 this Friday.  So: study them.  And by that we mean: redo them, solve them from scratch, and keep doing that until you can do this fluently, quickly, effortlessly.
 
Quiz2 will be on this Friday.  Part of it will cover material in quiz2-practice.  So: be sure to thoroughly study and review all the material in quiz2-practice, so you know that material very well by Friday.  Another part of quiz2 may cover week1 material, and then more rigorously than quiz1 did (since you've now done hw1 and had a week to study that material).  So: be sure to thoroughly study and review week1 material, too.
 
The bottom line is this:  you cannot learn this without doing it.  So: do it.  And the only way to be sure you know how to fluently solve a problem is in fact to fluently solve it, from scratch.  So: do that.
 
This hint reduces to this simple advice:  Practice, practice, practice.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

The importance of practice (quiz+hw) in 15-112
Hi again.  Here is another super-helpful hint on how to succeed in 15-112:  Practice.
 
And then:  practice, practice, practice.
 
You cannot learn this material (at least not nearly well enough) by watching lectures or videos or studying notes.  Those are good things, and helpful (we hope!), but woefully insufficient.  The ONLY way to learn this material is by DOING.
 
If you want to confirm that you can solve a problem, solve it, starting from scratch.  At this point, you are all expected to be able to quickly solve all 26 problems that were included in quiz1-practice, hw1-practice, and hw1.  Any of these, or any variant of these, can appear on any future quiz or exam, including quiz2 this Friday.  So: study them.  And by that we mean: redo them, solve them from scratch, and keep doing that until you can do this fluently, quickly, effortlessly.
 
Quiz2 will be on this Friday.  Part of it will cover material in quiz2-practice.  So: be sure to thoroughly study and review all the material in quiz2-practice, so you know that material very well by Friday.  Another part of quiz2 may cover week1 material, and then more rigorously than quiz1 did (since you've now done hw1 and had a week to study that material).  So: be sure to thoroughly study and review week1 material, too.
 
The bottom line is this:  you cannot learn this without doing it.  So: do it.  And the only way to be sure you know how to fluently solve a problem is in fact to fluently solve it, from scratch.  So: do that.
 
This hint reduces to this simple advice:  Practice, practice, practice.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Switching to 15-110
Hi all.  I hope you enjoyed a lovely weekend, and that hw1 and quiz1 went well for you.  The medians on each were quite high, so it seems we are off to a strong start so far.  Kudos!
 
Now, for those who are struggling with the rigor or the pace (or both): we are just ramping up, and it will get more intense.  By week4 we will be at full speed.
 
So:  now that you have some idea what this is, now is the time to seriously consider moving to 15-110.   And if you are going to make the move, today is the day to do it!
 
You can move to 15-110 now without any grade penalty.  And if you are going to wind up in that course anyhow, you want to be there as soon as possible, fully participating, learning their material, doing their hw's, preparing for their exams.  You get the idea.
 
Moving to 15-110 is not quitting, and there is no shame in it.  None at all.  It is a fine course and also a solid stepping stone for those who then wish to continue with 15-112 in the future.
 
If you wish to discuss this, Prof Ada and I are happy to chat, so please stop by.  You might also benefit from speaking with Prof Kaynar (15-110 faculty and a really nice person!).
 
In any case, if you are going to make the move, now is the time to make it.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Hackathons Demystified, tomorrow (Sunday) 6:30pm, Doherty A302
 
Hi all.  Please see the post below from former-112-student and MellonHeads lead and general Hackathon advocate Avi Romanoff about a really interesting non-112 event tomorrow (Sunday), 6:30pm, that may interest many of you:

Optional lecture starting now (let's get more people here)
Hey all.  Historically, we get about 100+ students at this first optional lecture.
 
Today, now, we have.....  SIX.
 
Bizarre.
 
This is totally cool stuff, and it's only covered here, not in the main.  Surely there are many dozens of you who would enjoy and benefit from it.
 
David

Reminder: optional/advanced lecture starts at 10am today in Hamburg Hall 1502
From @82 #4:
 
Optional Lecture, [today] (Saturday), 10am to noon, Hamburg Hall 1502
I will lead our first optional/advanced lecture [today], from 10am to noon (or maybe a bit later, we'll see), in Hamburg Hall 1502.  This is not part of the core course, and is not a review session.  Instead, in these talks we will cover interesting and challenging topics that are generally just beyond the 112 curriculum.  Unlike the main course, where the goal is for you to thoroughly master the material, in these optional talks the goal is for you to gain exposure to the material.  So we move quickly, focusing on Big Ideas.  It's a fun time.  It's also entirely optional, and does not help nor hurt your 15-112 grade (we don't take attendance).  Hope to see some of you there!
 
David

Quiz1 grades
Hi all.  Our amazing CA's finished grading quiz1 last night (thanks, CA's!!!), and the results were on average quite solid.  The median was 87, which is quite high, but we expect it to be quite high on this quiz as we pre-published the questions.  :-)
 
You can find your grade by going to autolab and clicking on "gradebook".
 
Here is a histogram of grades:

 
 
If you scored below 80, you should think about how to better prepare for future quizzes.  You cannot learn this material just by watching us do it.  The ONLY way to learn this is for you to do it yourself.  So:  practice, practice, practice.
 
And...  If you scored below 70, you should reach out to your CA's now and let them know, and form a plan to ensure you have the best chance to get started on the right foot this semester.
 
And...  For everyone, with this quiz score in hand now, you might rethink whether 15-110 is a more suitable option for you at this time.
 
We have barely started.  Things will get harder and faster-paced soon.  Now is the time to make really good decisions and fall into really healthy and productive and sustainable patterns of success.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Autolab hints, Struggling hints, 15-110, optional lecture, and more
Hi all.  I hope quiz1 is going or already went well for you!  And I hope you are enjoying the snow!!!
 
Here are a batch of announcements for the Ides of January:
 
Some autolab hints
Login through the course webpage
There are multiple ways to get to autolab, some which used to work but no longer work, and some that always work.  The one most reliable way is to use the link we provide on the course webpage.  So please do that!

Login by clicking on the "Sign in with your CMU account" link

Make a trial hw1 submission early (today even!)
This is to make sure you understand how to submit, and how to view the results of your submission.  You do not want to find out on Sunday at 9:59pm that you do not know how to do this.

Be sure to read the autograder output carefully!
When you submit, you have to wait a short while (sometimes a couple seconds, sometimes up to a minute) for the autograder to run.  Then you can refresh the page with the results of the run, and it will display your score.  You should click on the score, as it is a link to a popup containing all the super-helpful autograder feedback.  In most (if not quite all) cases when you lose points, the autograder helpfully tells you the specific test case that your code failed on, the expected (correct) output, and the observed (incorrect) output.  Very helpful!

Struggling?  Use your resources wisely!
If you are struggling a bit now, that's ok.  This is hard (though, really, it will get a bit harder next week and each week for the first 4 weeks or so, then it levels off for a while).  If you are struggling, or even if not, you are strongly encouraged to use all the resources available to you.  First, contact your CA's.  They very much want to help, with tutoring and small-group sessions, but also with helping you manage your approach to the course.  Also, go to large-group sessions (Wed/Thu night), and to CA and faculty OH (office hours).  And also use piazza!  It can be extremely helpful, and timely!

Consider 15-110
If you find this material and pace overly daunting, you should seriously consider moving to 15-110 this semester.  It's a fine course which satisfies many department's programming requirement, and helps provide a gentler on-ramp to 15-112, which you could take in the summer, or fall, or later.  Most students who take 15-110 are very happy they did so.  If you are heading towards an emotionally and academically difficult outcome in 15-112, maybe it makes more sense to have a healthier and more productive semester in 15-110, followed perhaps by a much-improved 15-112 experience later on.  In any case, you should give this serious thought if it may apply to your circumstances.  And, of course, Prof Ada and I are very happy to discuss this with you.

Optional Lecture, Tomorrow (Saturday), 10am to noon, Hamburg Hall 1502
I will lead our first optional/advanced lecture tomorrow, from 10am to noon (or maybe a bit later, we'll see), in Hamburg Hall 1502.  This is not part of the core course, and is not a review session.  Instead, in these talks we will cover interesting and challenging topics that are generally just beyond the 112 curriculum.  Unlike the main course, where the goal is for you to thoroughly master the material, in these optional talks the goal is for you to gain exposure to the material.  So we move quickly, focusing on Big Ideas.  It's a fun time.  It's also entirely optional, and does not help nor hurt your 15-112 grade (we don't take attendance).  Hope to see some of you there!

Optional lecture reprise
For those who wish to attend but have a conflict, we will offer a CA-led optional lecture reprise (basically, a duplicate of the talk).  The day, time, and location is TBD, but probably some evening early next week.  We'll post back here soon with details.

MLK event
This is not a 112 event, but I have been asked to share this with you.  The organizer noted that there is experiential learning credit for engineers, and lots of free pizza.

"Colors@CMU and Call to Action are presenting panels and discussion sessions about student and faculty experiences regarding diversity at CMU. The event starts [on MLK Day] at Rangos at 12 PM with a pizza lunch for those who attend and will end at 2PM after the panels are over. There will be Breakout sessions from 2 to 3 PM in Peter/Wright/McKenna."

Chrystal Thomas <chrystal@andrew.cmu.edu>
Colors@CMU President

Social Impact opportunity at TartanHacks
This also is not a 112 event, but may be of interest to the 112 community, and the organizer (a former 112 student) assures that 112 students will be able to make meaningful contributions even with their limited coding experience:

Hello,
My name is Satvika Neti (<sneti@andrew.cmu.edu>), and together with another CMU student, Ashley Sobhani, and the Sexual Assault & Relationship Violence Prevention Committee of Student Senate, have collaborated with the Title IX Office, and ScottyLabs to organize the first ever Social Impact Category of TartanHacks, the largest hackathon on campus.

Our mission is to organize a hackathon that focuses on building applications and programs surrounding the bystander effect and rape culture on CMU?s campus and beyond. Rather than focusing on secondary risk reduction, which focuses on prevention and has been tackled by various organizations across the country, we will be focusing on primary risk reduction, which tackles rape culture directly. We believe there is a larger gap in technological prevention methods in this area. Our motivation is to bridge the gap between colleges on campus in regards to discussions surrounding sexual assault and relationship based violence. We want to incorporate these new technologies into the fight against gender-based issues. Our target audience is students on campus who have strengths in technology and programming but may or may not be offered opportunities to address these importantsocial issues.
 
We will be partnering with TartanHacks, the largest hackathon on CMU?s campus, which will be held the weekend of February 6th, 2016. We will be hosting a dinner before the event on January 29th, 2016, where hackathon participants will get to meet people from the CMU Title IX office and get a better sense of what primary prevention methods entail. We will also be hosting two Crash Course sessions for the same purpose on January 22ndand 30th, at 5 pm in Wean Hall 5201. We are looking for sponsors to offer prizes in the Social Impact Category of the hackathon to incentivize people to build apps such as the ones listed below. Bloomberg has just become our first sponsor, having pledged $1,000 toward building out the winning application and giving back to the campus community.
 
Here is a list of sample applications and programs that deal with primary prevention in some capacity. We are hoping that these will both inspire and provide guidance for the hackers at the hackathon.
  ?Night Owl? - This app provides users with a safe and anonymous way to report potentially dangerous situations at social events.
  ?SPOT? - This app provides an opportunity for fraternity guests to anonymously report dangerous situations observed at an event to fraternity risk managers in a more immediate and efficient manner.
  ?Decisions That Matter? - CMU created Role Playing Game that is related to educating people on rape culture and the bystander effect.
  ?Streets of Belfast? - This application is used in Belfast, Northern Ireland to foster conflict resolution through plays and skits. We can use this as a model to facilitate bystander training through videos and actors.
  CMU specific mobile reporting app
  Reporting flowchart app
  Data visualizations, using data from the CLERY act, or the White House data jam
  Apps helping to deal with the language/cultural barrier for international students
  An app modeled after Tinder for Sexual Support Network - where people can ?match? with someone from the SSN based on different criteria to learn more about these issues.

If you have any questions or comments or are interested in helping sponsoring the event, please feel free to reach out to Satvika Neti at sneti@andrew.cmu.edu or Ashley Sobhani at ashley.sobhani@gmail.com. We are excited to host the first gender-based hackathon in the United States, and we would be greatly honored to have you involved in the process! Here is our Facebook Page: https://www.facebook.com/sarvphackathon/ for more information. 
Registration for TartanHacks opens Jan 22, and we would love for anyone interested in this to register when it opens!

Thank you!
Satvika Neti (<sneti@andrew.cmu.edu>) and Ashley Sobhani 
 
Carpe diem.

David

Announcements du jour (14-Jan-2016)
Hi all.  By now, you all should have Python3 and IEP and perhaps Sublime installed, you should have carefully consumed all the assigned videos in the course notes (and if not, fix that, now), attended a super-helpful recitation, and be ready for today's lecture, and well on your way to be ready for tomorrow's quiz and Sunday's hw1 deadline.  Woohoo!  The train is rolling...!
 
Some announcements:
 
Watch the videos
It's clear that some of you skipped this step, as evidenced by you asking questions that are answered simply and directly in the videos (and as also evidenced by many saying outright they didn't watch the videos).  Please watch them.  We move increasingly quickly through increasingly challenging material.  You should do the assigned work when it is assigned, and not let it build up.  Establish good study habits now, to sustain you when things get bumpy.  So:  watch the videos!

Attend the optional review session tonight
Only 25 attended last night.  Ugh.  Yes, this stuff may not be too hard for some of you as yet, but still, you want to learn it very, very well, to establish a rock-solid foundation on which the rest of your learning this semester will be built.  There is a duplicate optional review session tonight, starting at 8pm in WEH 7500.  Let's get more people there!

Do not add comments to our announcements
If you add a comment or question to our announcements, then all your classmates get spammed.  Please don't!  Instead, post a new private question to all instructors, and we'll get you a super-quick answer!  Thanks!

Quiz1 tomorrow!
Quiz1 is tomorrow.  It will be overtly similar to the material in quiz1-practice.

Attend your assigned quiz time
We do not have enough seats for you to attend other times, so you must attend your assigned time, according to the section autolab says you are in.

Friday quiz extended time protocol
This is only for those of you who have submitted a letter to Prof Ada or to me from Larry Powell's office confirming that you qualify for extended time, and this is also only for Friday quizzes (midterms and finals are handled differently).  In that case, attend your assigned time, and inform your CA/proctor before you begin the quiz that you get extended time.  Since quizzes normally run for the full duration (50 minutes), you get twice that time, or 100 minutes.  Before you start, your proctor should write and circle the start and end times at the top of your quiz.  For the second 50 minutes, you will probably have to step outside and find somewhere nearby (such as the Citadel Commons) to finish.  Of course, you are still in quiz mode (and we will occasionally proctor you), so do not communicate with anyone or use a computer, etc, in this time.  When you are done, return to the lab and submit your quiz to a CA/proctor on duty then.  If you are in the last (4:30pm) section, instead of returning your quiz to the lab, go to office hours (which should be basically right there) and submit your quiz to a CA on duty there.

Check your section in autolab
Autolab and SIO may disagree on your section assignment, and that's fine.  As far as we are concerned, autolab holds the definitive answer.  So if your autolab section does not match the one you think you are enrolled in, please let me know right away.  Thanks.

Small-group sessions through Saturday night
Hw1 originally said you had until Friday night for these, but we extended that to Saturday night, though you should already have signed up for one of these sessions (contact your CA now if you have not done so).  Note that small-group sessions are only required in hw1, but they are super-strongly-encouraged all semester long.  Spend time with your CA's.  Not only are they really nice, they also will help you learn better and faster, driving up your grade while driving down your stress.  What a deal!

Recitation decorum (no electronics, etc)
Please give your CA's and your classmates in recitation the same respect you do in lecture.  Arrive on time, pay attention, do not use electronics, etc.  Thanks!

Base jokes
Q: Why do computer scientists often confuse Christmas and Halloween?
A: Because DEC 25 == OCT 31.

There are 10 kinds of people in the world:  those who understand binary and those who don't.

11 cheers for binary!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Recitation info, waitlists, installs, hw1, and more
Hi all.  Here's a bunch of announcements for this wintry morn:
 
amalgamated posts
To help reduce post volume, we often will group numerous announcements together, as we did here.  Please be sure to read all of them carefully, though, and not skip some important information in the crowd!

section CA assignments
The syllabus now contains a list of which CA's are assigned to which sections.  You can find the CA names and their andrew id's so you can email them.  Also, to help identify them, you can check out their pictures here.

recitation locations
Also in the Schedule of Classes part of the syllabus, you can find the rooms for your recitations today, as these are scattered over campus.  Each line in that table contains two rooms, the first is for your Wed recitations, the second is for your Friday quiz labs.

waitlists
For those of you on a waitlist:  it is crucial that you fully participate all elements of the course from day one, including attending lecture and your assigned recitation (today!) and quiz labs, and submitting the hw's on time in autolab.  We'll clear the waitlists as soon as we can, though it may take a few weeks.

sublime install videos
Rumor has it that many of the Sublime install issues some of you are facing are actually addressed in Josh's most excellent Sublime-install-help videos, available for Mac or Windows.

don't use IDLE
While you should have IDLE installed and available as a worst-case fallback, it is not a good choice for daily use (it lacks line numbers, an 80-char line, etc, and often crashes on some platforms).  We highly recommend that you use IEP ("eep"), and perhaps Sublime ("sublime").  Installation instructions are here.

installation q's --> OH (not piazza)
It is nearly impossible to diagnose installation problems over piazza, so please bring those to OH today where we will gladly help you!  Thanks!

hw1
Hw1 is released and is due Sunday at 10pm.  Good luck!

hw1 CA meetings
Hw1 includes a required meeting with your recitation CA's.  You should hear from your CA's soon (today in any case) on the details to set up this meeting.  Please be on time, and have fun!

website colors
Thanks to the design sensibilities of Anqi and Rudina, the short-lived yellow website is now a lovely hue of green.  Thanks, Anqi and Rudina!  :-)

happy birthday, wikipedia!
Today is Wikipedia's 15th birthday. Read about Wikipedia's history here on the Wikipedia page on Wikipedia!
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

Today's hw + plan for Wed/Thu
Hi all.  As mentioned in class, today is the one-and-only time all semester that we will give same-day hw.  Here it is, due tomorrow before recitation (though it is not submitted formally, but still, you really should do it):

Install Python3 (see "Getting Started" for details, go to OH tonight if you need help) (note that OH will run from 6-10pm tonight, longer than the syllabus says)

Install an IDE (we recommend IEP since it is easy, but we also recommend Sublime since it is powerful.  I suggest IEP first, then do week1 + hw1, then install Sublime, too.  You can do whatever you prefer, though.
To install IEP...
0) Install Python3 as needed from www.python.org
1) Download and install IEP from here
2) Launch IEP and close extra frames, only use editor frame (on top) and shell frame (on bottom), so it mirrors IDLE's simple setup.
3) Select down-triangle from top-left of shell, and select "Edit Shell Configurations", then "add config" and add a Python3 configuration, then reorder it on the configuration tabs to be the first tab, then exit.
4) Relaunch IEP, for a simple Python3 test, use this program:  print(5/3),  then choose Run File as Script or Execute File from the Run menu.  You should not get 1 but instead should get 1.666666667.
To install Sublime
Follow the instructions in Getting Started.
Here are helpful videos from Josh (a CA):
Mac: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ErjdodlHy3k
Windows: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9YPi9wgol1c

Watch the videos and study the code in the notes for these topics:
Getting Started
Functions
Data and Expressions
 
Tomorrow in recitation, the CA's will review the material in Functions and in Data and Expressions.  But you definitely want to have watched the videos and studied the notes first!
 
Thursday in lecture, Prof Ada and I will cover Conditionals, then we'll cover the quiz1-practice materials, and finally as time allows we'll do some problems from hw1-practice.
 
Friday in lab you will take quiz1, which will be extremely similar to a subset of problems taken from quiz1-practice.
 
Also, in addition to piazza and to unstructured general OH (office hours) every night, we will have optional additional structured (CA-led large lecture) help/study sessions on both Wednesday and Thursday nights from 8-10pm in WEH 7500 (they are duplicates, so most people generally attend one or the other, and again, they are optional).  They will chiefly cover additional problems from hw1-practice.  These are very helpful and highly recommended, especially if you have no prior programming experience.
 
And don't panic if some/lots/all of this is really foreign and daunting and confusing to you at this point.  That's normal and to be expected.  That feeling fades, though perhaps not for a month or two.
 
For now, don't panic, do try hard, and enjoy the ride.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

The volume and pace of posts (and everything else)
Hi all.  This is the third and last post for this morning.  It regards the volume of posts.  There will be a lot of them.  We try to keep the volume down, truly (yes, truly), but this is a fairly intense course moving quickly through some challenging material.  Also, there are many moving parts to this course, with multiple course-related activities on literally every day of the week all semester long.  So we rely on piazza to keep us all in synch, which requires all kinds of announcements, which means there will be a steady high volume of posts here.
 
Even so:  it is important that you read all of them, and read them carefully.
 
We often post hints or clarifications here during hw's (homeworks).  Not reading those is, well, not a very good idea.  More to the point, you'll waste tons of time -- time you don't have -- if you don't read the posts.
 
So:  read the posts.  You don't have time not to read them!
 
We'll do our best to keep the volume down (and we have reduced it considerably from a few years ago, though you might not believe that once we get rolling), but alas, it will be high nonetheless.
 
The good news: despite the high volume, at least the signal-to-noise ratio remains high (or so we think and hope).  And hopefully a lot of this will be fun and interesting for you, too (ditto).
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Piazza etiquette
Hi again.  Regarding piazza...  Feel free to start asking questions!
 
Please remember to mark your questions as "private", and please place them in the "student-questions" folder and not the "announcements" folder.
 
Our announcements, such as this one, are the only messages that should be in the "announcements" folder.
 
Also, please mark your posts for all instructors (which is the default), which includes all 44 CA's as well as Prof Ada and myself.  This helps us ensure you get the fastest and best possible responses.
 
Also, if you include code in your posts, please either place it in a code tag (using the "code" button), or attach it with Insert/File.  Please do not simply paste the code into your message.  It will not format correctly and it will be very hard for us to help you then.
 
And, again, please mark your posts as private.  Otherwise, you'll be spamming 500+ classmates, and perhaps accidentally sharing your code with them, too.  Ugh and double ugh.
 
As we will discuss in class, piazza is best for specific questions, such as "Why is (3/2) equal to 1 in Python2 but not in Python3?".  It is not so good for open-ended questions like "I don't understand how recursion works" (which is not a question, actually, but you get the idea).  Those really require in-person help at office hours, which happily we provide 7 days a week!
 
Also, importantly: we will not debug your code for you on piazza!  So please do not post a wall of code and ask "Where is my bug?"  This is not because we are uncaring!  No!  Just the opposite, in fact!  It is a simple fact that nobody can create code without also creating bugs in said code.  And so it is absolutely essential that you develop really solid debugging skills.  And if we debugged your code for you, we would be crippling you.  We don't do that!  Of course, we will help you, but by helping you develop your own debugging skills.  So we may help you figure out how to isolate a bug, how to generate the simplest test case that tickles the bug, how to use judicious print statements to help box in the bug, and so on.  But we will not just tell you where the bug is, and in any case we will not do any of this on piazza.  Debugging help is done in person at office hours, and again is focused on helping you learn how to debug and not in fixing any particular bug you may have.
 
Enough for now.  :-)
 
Once again, welcome aboard, and good luck, and have fun!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Welcome to 15-112-s16!
Hi all and welcome to 15-112-s16!!!
 
This message is posted to piazza (see here), which we will use for all official course announcements, and where you should also post your questions.  Everyone is expected to read our piazza posts promptly, and also to use piazza regularly to get help when you cannot get in-person help at office hours.
 
Here is the course website:  http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112
 
And here is the backup/permanent course website (in case the main one is down, also the  main link changes every semester, but the backup is permanent):  http://www.kosbie.net/cmu/spring-16/15-112/
 
The course website contains important nav links on the left, including:
Syllabus 
Schedule 
Piazza 
Autolab 
Gallery
 
The Syllabus contains course policies, meeting times and locations, staff photos, and so on.  You should carefully read all of it today!
 
The Schedule contains links to all the course notes (which contain short videos to help you review, or in case you miss lecture (which is still required in general)), homeworks, quizzes, tests, and so on.  The course content is chiefly structured around the Schedule.
 
Piazza, as noted above, is used for official announcements and for you to post questions to our course staff (not to each other).
 
Autolab is used to submit homeworks, to autograde them when applicable, and also for your online gradebook (we do not use Blackboard for this or any other purpose).
 
The Gallery is a collection of many (though far from all) term projects from earlier versions of the course.  It is definitely a good idea for you to drift through there from time to time, perhaps even starting today, to start getting some ideas about what you may wish to do for your term project.  Be inspired!!!!
 
We'll discuss all this and more in lecture today, which is in a short while.
 
For now, welcome aboard, and...  Carpe diem!!!
 
David

Carpe diem!
Hi all.  While Mark will still have OH on Mon/Tue/Wed, and he will then formally shut down the course (thanks, Mark!), this is my last post of the semester (and in fact, my last online anything for a while, as I'll be offline for medical reasons from the moment I hit the post button until sometime in early January).
 
I have thoroughly enjoyed working with all of you this semester, watching you confront so many challenges with grace and wit and determination and guile, and watching you ultimately conquer them and produce such extraordinary results.  Kudos to all of you!!!
 
As you move on to new and greater challenges at CMU and beyond, I wish you great success, and I ask and hope that you keep in touch, and in particular share your stories, perhaps some even about how you used computation in some interesting way.   :-)
 
To that end, I imagine that perhaps up to one-fifth of you will become professional software developers of some sort.  But I further expect that most, perhaps nearly all, of you will use computation from time to time -- even if it's not in your course description or your job description -- to make better art, or better music, or better science, or better engineering, or better medicine.  In some way, in your way, most of you will surely make a better world for all of us, and maybe your hard-won coding skills might just help if in some small way.
 
I wish you well in that pursuit, and in all your pursuits.  And I very much hope you have good fun along the way.
 
Carpe diem.  May you seize every day.
 
David

Final call for FCE's
Hi all.  Most of you are done now, and spinning down from the whirlwind of life at CMU. Kudos!  For the rest, you're almost there....
 
One more thing on the 112 front:  please fill out FCE's if you have not done so already.

They close today, so this is the last call for them.
 
About 2/3rds of you have responded, which is great, and many thanks for that!
 
But everyone's voice counts.  We value everyone's opinions, definitely including yours, and we welcome all constructive feedback about what worked well and where we can improve things.  You can be certain we will very much take your opinion to heart.
 
You can access FCE's at this website.  If you have not done so yet, please fill them out today.
 
And, once again, many thanks!!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Semester Grades
Hi all.  Mark and I just wrapped up computing and entering all the semester grades.  The results were, once again, simply remarkable, with the most A's, the most A's-and-B's, and the fewest C's, fewest D's, and fewest R's ever in this course.  This simply has been the strongest semester ever for 15-112.  WELL DONE!!!!!  You all rocked!  :-)
 
Some details:  first, we computed AMG as per the course syllabus. Note that AMG is capped at 75, because the upper limit is a C by this method.  Then, your semester numeric grade is the max of your normal semester average and your AMG average.  Note that Autolab now includes your AMG in its computation of your semester average.
 
Then, we round up, so 89.5 is an A, 79.5 is a B, and so forth.
 
Then, Mark and I carefully considered every case on the "bubble", so everyone just below the cutoff to the next-higher letter grade.  We determined each of these few outcomes on a case-by-case basis.
 
At that point, we entered your letter grades into FIO, and they should appear sometime soon for you in SIO.
 
As for the results, again, magnificent!  Here are the gaudy distributions, for those who completed the entire course (including term project and final):
    A   41%
    B   39%
    C   18%
    D   2%
    R   1%
 
If you prefer, here is a pie chart of the same gaudy data:
 

 
If you have a question or concern about your semester grade, you can bring them to Mark's OH on Mon/Tue/Wed, or you can email Mark or me (preferably both of us).  However, you should understand that we would only make changes based on actual, demonstrable grading errors, and these rarely if ever happen at this point, given how careful we are in determining and entering semester grades.
 
Also, you should know that a B or even a C in this course is still something you can be very proud of.  This is not an easy endeavor, and you have to work very hard and learn a great deal of technical information to obtain a passing grade in this course.
 
And this:  with so many students, no matter where we draw lines between grades, there will always be students just a tiny fraction of a point below the lines..  So if we were to move a line for you, that just creates the exact same situation for another student who is then just below the new line.  So while it may seem reasonable in isolation to move the line for one student, when viewed this way it is not.  Lines have to be drawn, and they are drawn reasonably, and now we must accept those outcomes.

We are wrapping things up now.  We are very happy to talk to you about how things went, how we can improve the course, how we can help you make the most out of your experience in the course, how we can help you plan for what's next on your academic or professional horizon, or really anything else.
 
So please stop by my OH today, Mark's OH next week, and also send us emails, and stop by in the spring semester.
 
For now, congratulations again on a spectacular finish to a wonderful semester.
 
Kudos!!!!!
 
David

Final exam grades (great job!!!!)
Hi all.  Thanks to the tremendous efforts (once again!) of our wonderful CA's, the finals are now graded.  And...
 
The results were simply unprecedented, with a weighted median of 89.2, which is actually ridiculously high.  Almost too high, even.  Thanks to your great efforts and simply awesome results, we may need to recalibrate the exam in the future.  But not for now.  The results stand, and they are a testament to your collective hard work and superior results this semester.  Kudos!!!!
 
A few more notes:
 
The weighted grades are now in autolab.

You may view your graded exams in Mark's office hours on Mon/Tue/Wed afternoons.  He will post here soon with details.  Note that you may not take an exam out of Mark's office at that time, but you may review it and discuss it with him then.

You may also view your exam any time over the next year at least in my office, where I will keep them on record.

We have not yet computed AMG grades, nor semester grades. We will do that tomorrow, hopefully, and in any case we will post back here as soon as that is done.

Once again, great job everyone!!!!!
 
Carpe diem!

David

Final exam grades (great job!!!!)
Hi all.  Thanks to the tremendous efforts (once again!) of our wonderful CA's, the finals are now graded.  And...
 
The results were simply unprecedented, with a weighted median of 89.2, which is actually ridiculously high.  Almost too high, even.  Thanks to your great efforts and simply awesome results, we may need to recalibrate the exam in the future.  But not for now.  The results stand, and they are a testament to your collective hard work and superior results this semester.  Kudos!!!!
 
A few more notes:
 
The weighted grades are now in autolab.

You may view your graded exams in Mark's office hours on Mon/Tue/Wed afternoons.  He will post here soon with details.  Note that you may not take an exam out of Mark's office at that time, but you may review it and discuss it with him then.

You may also view your exam any time over the next year at least in my office, where I will keep them on record.

We have not yet computed AMG grades, nor semester grades. We will do that tomorrow, hopefully, and in any case we will post back here as soon as that is done.

Once again, great job everyone!!!!!
 
Carpe diem!

David

Do cite, do not copy! (Cite makes right)
Hi all.  Sadly, we are now processing four separate TP citation/copy issues, which is a new record, and not the kind of record we hope to set.
 
While one or two of these may be semi-innocent errors resulting in moderate penalties, another one or two may well be course failure events.
 
Please, everyone, please do not copy or plagiarize.
 
Please be certain to very clearly cite code you use.  This is always true, and then especially so for large blocks of code that are central to your project.
 
Cite makes right.

Carpe diem.

David

Quick poll: Qualities of a Strong CA (please reply asap if possible)
Hi all.  It would super-helpful if you could take a few minutes to fill out this optional form telling us the qualities you believe a strong CA should have, and also perhaps sharing a brief anecdote or two.
 
It should take maybe 2 minutes to fill out.
 
And it would be really helpful if you did!
 

 
 
David

Bring laptops tomorrow, my OH tomorrow, hw10 grades, backup, backup, backup!
Hi all.  A few more announcements for this last November night (well, for 48 weeks):
 
Bring laptops to lecture tomorrow
You'll have an in-class mini-lab, and you'll need your laptops for that.

Attend lecture tomorrow!
You'll get quiz11 credit.  And unlike last week, this time we will actually take attendance!  :-)

My OH tomorrow (noon to 1:25pm)
I have to end my OH at 1:25pm tomorrow, because I'll be covering Mark's lecture, because Mark will be on jury duty...  Civic duty calls!

Hw10 grades
These are posted now.  Note that these include some subjective grading.  To help set your expectations both for hw10 and on term projects, which also include subjective grading, we are not likely to regrade subjectively graded items.  A low grade alone is not a reason for a regrade.  You have to have a reason, such as perhaps the grader explicitly not seeing something that was included, or some such.  Not liking your grade is not grounds for a regrade, especially on a subjectively graded assignment.

Backup, backup, backup!  And backup some more!
Every semester, it always happens that at least one student accidentally deletes some or all of their term project.  Ugh!  Don't let this be you!  Your main defense is to fastidiously backup your work.  One way is to use Box or GitHub or some other solution that automatically backs up versions of your work.  Another way is to simply keep copying your entire TP folder, all of it, over and over again.  I suggest using a naming scheme like tp-30-nov-8am, but frankly a simple numbering scheme like tp-backup-17 would be fine.  In any case, don't just keep the most-recent backup.  Keep all of them, at least until the end of the semester.  And don't worry about taking up all that disk space.  Disk space is cheap (well, free, mostly).  Losing your work is very expensive.  So backup your work.  Every day.  Even more than once a day.  Backup, backup, backup!

Really, backup your work!
Now is a fine time to backup your work!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

UG research and funding opps + Google is your friend + Tech after B + MVP!
Hi all.  A few more Monday morning missives:
 
Joanna Dickert + Undergraduate Research Opportunities
Tomorrow in lecture, Joanna Dickert has kindly offered to provide a short presentation (in each lecture) on Undergraduate Research Opportunities and Funding at CMU, specifically relating to students who have completed 15-112. (Thanks, Joanna!).  Here is a bit more info on her talk:
Over the years, many students have used the computational foundation from 15-112 in a variety of undergraduate research projects. Whether these projects are undertaken independently or part of a broader project led by a faculty member, the Undergraduate Research Office (URO) provides funding throughout the academic year and summer to support student work. More information can be found at the following links:
 
Abstracts of past projects
(http://www.cmu.edu/uro/MoM/program.html)
Semester undergraduate research funding
(http://www.cmu.edu/uro/SURG/index.html)
Summer undergraduate research funding
(http://www.cmu.edu/uro/SURF/index.html)
Conference presentation funding
(http://www.cmu.edu/uro/PresAward/index.html)
 
Please contact Joanna Dickert (joannad@andrew.cmu.edu) with questions or to schedule an appointment.


Google is your friend!
We are seeing a fair number of questions on piazza and in OH that are easily answered by a simple Google search.  Which you should do!  Yes, all semester we cautioned against this, saying that while some online resources are great, some are just awful, and you should only use online resources if you have the maturity and sophistication to tell the difference.  But now you do!  So, with appropriate caution and skepticism, go ahead and use those resources, particularly for those quick-to-answer-by-a-google-search sorts of questions.  Search away!  And caveat emptor!

Tech after B
Some of you have crazy wonderful ideas about how to use advanced tech for some advanced feature for your project, and wonder how that relates to the tech demo deadline.  So here's the scoop:  for now, you may no longer add new tech to your project.  You need to hunker down and get things working, using whatever you've got at this point.  But once you make a working "B-level" project, according to your mentor, then you are free to use any technology in any way, without a tech demo even!  Because if that falls through, at least you have that "B-level" project as a safety net.  So for now, keep laser-focused on getting a project working.  Add the crazy wonderful stuff after that.

MVP

In industry, many folks use the term "MVP", meaning "Minimum Viable Product".  It's something you should be doing now, to secure that B as early as possible in the TP cycle.  Think hard about this, and discuss it with your mentor, and have a clear picture of what your MVP is.  To be an MVP in this context, it has to have these qualities:   (1) it is a B-level project; and (2) if you remove anything from the spec, it will no longer be a B-level project.  So everything in the MVP is both sufficient and necessary to secure a B-level project.

To be clear, an MVP involves compromises.  What's the least-interesting UI that could secure a B?  What is the simplest gameplay?  What is the simplest graphics?  Do you need levels?  Do you need any AI?   Etc, etc.   By going through this exercise, you'll focus your efforts on precisely those features that most quickly secure your passing grade on the TP, which many of you are actually close to achieving at this point (and the rest of you would do well to move quickly to that point).  Then you can go nuts trying to mold the minimally-passable MVP project into a wonderful, beautiful, high-grade-scoring project.  But first things first...

While we do not grade on quantity of your code, we would expect that the typical MVP B-level project, with reasonably well-designed and well-written code, would contain somewhere around 750 effective lines of original code, and for some projects with lower algorithmic density, perhaps more towards 1k lines.  We say "effective" lines since we don't include redundant or excessively unstylistic code in this count.  This is only a ballpark figure, though, and not actually part of the criteria for determining your grade.  But if you are hovering around 250-500 effective lines of original code, then you almost surely do not have an MVP yet.  So this can be a helpful rule-of-thumb.

Carpe diem!

David

HRT Machine Learning Workshop announcement + signup/RSVP (Facebook event)
 
Hi all.  Please see the following announcement from HRT, and in particular if you are interested, please RSVP by joining their Facebook event.
It's a fine chance to see ML in action, meet some industry contacts, chat with some CMU alums, and get some nice swag, too!  :-)

TP submissions only via autolab
Hi all.  As previously noted, all TP submissions must be made via autolab.  In particular, no official submissions will be accepted by email.  The only way to receive a grade is to submit on time via autolab.
 
If your submission is larger than 10mb, you must still make an on-time autolab submission, fitting in 10mb, with as much as you can fit in that space.  If you need more than 10MB for all your files, then in addition to your autolab submission, you need to get your full submission to your CA by the same deadline, say by DropBox or a USB flash drive.  In any case, though, you must make as complete as possible of a submission to autolab by the posted deadlines.
 
Good luck!

David

TP extensions
Hi all.  As has been discussed, there are no extensions for TP deadlines, except in the most extreme circumstances.  For example, while academic or athletic travel may qualify for a hw extension, it would not qualify for a TP extension.  Similarly, an illness of a few days would not qualify, either.  You've known about these deadlines for months, you've had ample time to prepare for them, and they are when they are, without extensions.
 
With that said, of course we are here to help you meet those deadlines.  In addition, of course, it's not an all-or-nothing grading event.  That is, even if you have to make a partial submission, you will of course also receive partial credit.
 
So do your best, and be sure to submit whatever you have by the TP deadlines.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Some post-TG TP tidbits
Hi again.  Last post for a while.  :-)
 
Here are a few more announcements for this important weekend:
 
Make some Post-TG TP progress!
After a lovely day of rest and festivities, and hopefully a long night's sleep, it is time to get back into the game.  The end of the semester is coming quickly, and it's important that you make some good strides this weekend on your TP's.  Of course, keep everything in balance, and if you are at home still spend some time with your family.  But there are many hours in a day, and find some of them to spend on your TP's.  Do not procrastinate.  Do not leave this to the end.  Steady progress, every day. That is by far your best bet.

Tkinter is ok!
Some of you are lamenting that your modules and packages and such are not working out as you'd hoped.  That's fine.  Really.  Now is the time to make that decision, to put down the non-working stuff, to latch onto what you can do, and to do it well.  Tkinter is just fine.  We'll get lots of truly wonderful Tkinter-only TP's.  So if you are in that situation, embrace it, and put your mind to creating a clever, wonderful, Tkinter-only TP.  You can do it, and you can make it splendid!

Images in Tkinter
We are seeing lots of posts asking how to use images in Tkinter.  We covered that in the Images Demo here.  Follow the example closely, including modifying the run() function as needed.

Piazza is not for debugging
Some of you are posting huge walls of code to piazza and asking us to help debug them, especially in pyGame or openCV or some such.  This is not an effective use of piazza, and in fact, it's confusing the nature of CA/Mentor support at this stage of the course.  You really have to do your debugging yourself.  That's the exit criterion of the course, after all:  that you can design, build, debug, and package a program of your original design, for the most part on your own.  So we would be doing you no favors by debugging for you.  And in any case, we generally can't, not on piazza.

OH is kind of for that...
If you are really stuck on a debugging matter, you can try to bring it to OH, and we will try to help.  But it's not like a hw, where we have dozens of CA's all helping everyone on the same hw questions.  Here, the CA coverage is lighter (since they are so busy mentoring and grading and such), and each of you has your own unique, large, complicated project, and debugging can take hours.  The point is, again:  you are largely on your own now.  We are here to help, to be sure, but we just can't provide much help (but, again, that's a good thing, since you really need to show the world and yourself that you can do this).

Knowledge is power!
Knowing that you have to largely do this largely on your own, choose something appropriate, something that you can do largely on your own.  And remember to place your emphasis on quality over quantity.  A small, lovely project is way better than a large, meh project.  Also, it's way better to have something that is somewhat modest in design but that works completely, than to have something very ambitious in design that does not entirely work.  Remember that you cannot get a B unless your project works, no matter how ambitious, no matter how much effort went into it.  So choose well.  And get the core project working and working well before moving on to the riskier and more ambitious parts.

GHC Photo Puzzle Hunt
We had some fun yesterday with this.  You can try it when you are next in GHC if you are so inclined.  Have fun.  :-)

Google fun
For laughs, try Googling "a long time ago in a galaxy far far away".  Be sure to click on the volume button.
 
Carpe diem!

David

Save the date: HRT Machine Learning Workshop, Fri 4-Dec, 6:30pm-9pm, GHC 4401
Hi again.  As part of their generous ongoing support of 15-112, the folks at HRT (Hudson River Trading) will host a 15-112 HRT Machine Learning Workshop, where they will present (at a 112 level) the kinds of Machine Learning algorithms that are a critical part of their business technology, and indeed are used increasingly throughout industry.
 
We'll post more info here soon, but for now, if you are interested, note that the workshop is on Fri 4-Dec, 6:30pm-9:00pm, in GHC 4401 (Rashid Auditorium).
 
Thanks, and thanks HRT for your continued support of the 15-112 community!
 
David

(Belated) Happy Thanksgiving!!!
Hi all.  Things were so busy yesterday that I never sent this out.  Whoops.
 
I hope you all enjoyed a lovely Thanksgiving.
 
While we all certainly have our challenges and life is not always a bed of roses, I believe everyone also has very much to be thankful for, even in the worst of times, and Thanksgiving is a time to reflect on that.  In my case, foremost on my list of things I am thankful for is my family, followed immediately by my great fortune to work every day with so many wonderful, smart, dedicated, caring students.  So, thank you for that.  It is a joy and a privilege to work with each and every one of you.
 
Happy Thanksgiving!
 
David

TG move and lunch update (half hour late)
Hi all.  So it turns out that 10:30am is a bit early for college students, apparently.

We got a quorum by 11am, and started the movie then.
 
So we are running a half hour late.
 
Please show up for lunch at 12:30pm at GHC 4405.
 
See you soon!
 
David

TG movie and lunch
Hi all.  The location for the TG movie and lunch will be posted on my office door.
 
The movie starts at 10:30am.
 
Lunch starts with a fun pre-lunch activity promptly at noon (or as soon as the movie ends).  Please bring your laptop if you can.  Thanks.
 
See some of you soon!  :-)

David

Please be sure to cite carefully (and please do not plagiarize)
Hi all.  As the subject line says, in all your TP submissions, please be sure to cite carefully (and please do not plagiarize).
 
Of the hundreds of wonderful submissions we will receive, over 99% will contain all-original work.  Woohoo.
 
Sadly, though, that number is not exactly 100%, and in fact sometimes we receive plagiarized work.  In fact, we are now processing a plagiarism case in TP1.  Sigh.
 
You should know that we carefully check your submissions, and increasingly carefully on tp2 and even more so on tp3, and any plagiarism on a TP submission generally results in summarily failing the course and additional consequences at the university level.
 
That's awful.  Nobody wants that.  You don't want it.  We don't want it.  So please, please don't do it.
 
Just submit your own work, and be sure to clearly cite anything that requires citation.
 
And if for some reason you can't submit work that is up to your own standards, even then just submit what you have, given the time you have for it.  Nothing is worth plagiarizing.  It's just not worth it.
 
We are saying this here and now in the hopes that it helps you all make the right decisions, and do the right thing.  I would way, way, way prefer to never have to deal with another plagiarism case ever again.
 
Good luck with your projects, and have fun, and be inspired.  And cite properly.

Carpe diem.
 
David

Optional Thanksgiving Day Movie and Lunch sign-up (due by 3pm today)
Hi all.  For those of you (students and CA's) who will be on campus tomorrow, we'll have a little get together earlier in the day.  We'll start with a movie at 10:30am followed by lunch at noon.  The movie will be Thanksgiving-themed (I don't know of too many of these, and I'm not sure about "A Charlie Brown Thanksgiving", but "Planes, Trains, and Automobiles" is a good one).  The lunch will be as Thanksgiving-themed as possible.  :-)
 
So we get the right amount of food, please be sure to show up if you sign up!
 
Please use this form to sign up (even if you signed up on a previous form), by 3pm today.

Thanks, and Happy Thanksgiving, everyone!!!

David

Puzzle Hunt, Holy Grail, Quiz11 + TP1 grading, Midterm2 return, CA?
Hi all.  First, another hearty congratulations on wrapping up all the hw's and midterms and pre-TP content of 15-112, and then doing so well on all of it.  Woohoo!  And now...
 
The 15-112 Puzzle Hunt is today, at 2pm!
Have fun!!!!

Monty Python and the Holy Grail is today at 6pm in DH 2315
Have more fun!!!! Bring friends!!!  Ekke Ekke Ekke Ekke Ptangya Zoooooooom Boing Ni!!!!

Quiz11 grading and TP1 and this weekend
After much thoughtful deliberation, we have decided to somewhat relax how quiz11 will be graded.  It was announced to be the minimum of tp1, tp2, and the attendance grades.  Instead, it will be the average of these grades.  This is kinder and gentler if only it helps, and doesn't hurt by demotivating you to work hard on your TP1 deliverables this weekend.  We sure hope you are pouring yourselves into TP1.  You very much want to make great progress on your TP's before Thanksgiving.  History suggests that is really important.  Anyhow, please note the change to quiz11, which will in general result in much higher quiz11 scores for most of you.

Returning graded midterm2's
At this time, some students have not yet taken midterm2.  Before we can return them, you will then be on Thanksgiving break.  So unfortunately this means we cannot return the graded midterm2's until your next recitation, which is a week from Wednesday.  Even so, this gives you plenty of time to review them and prepare for the final exam, which isn't until 17-December anyhow.

Interested in being a 112 CA? (pre-application form due today)
Are you a current 15-112 student? Do you have a solid A (say, 93 or higher) on midterm2, or a solid A on all of quiz-average, midterm1, and course-average? Do you love to teach? Do you have strong people skills? Do you and those who know you consider yourself to be extremely reliable? Do you love the 112 material and being around your 112 classmates and CA's? Do you have time and energy for what amounts to an extra 12-unit class on your spring schedule? Do you want to CA 15-112 this spring? If you answered a strong YES to all these questions, please fill out this pre-application form. Note that we get about 10x as many applicants as there are positions to fill, so the competition is strong. Even so, we encourage applicants, as the only way have a great staff is to start with a great applicant pool! So, thanks, and good luck!
 
Carpe diem!

David

midterm2 grades
Hi all.  Thanks to the amazing collective efforts of the CA's (thanks, CA's!!!), midterm2 is now graded and in autolab.  By historic norms, this test was challenging, and a median of 78 would have been rock solid.  Instead, you did notably better, achieving a super-high 81 median.  That's fabulous!  We also had 5 scores of 100 or more, with a top score of a perfect 105.  Great job!!!  For those scoring lower than they hoped, you still have a month until the final, which covers basically this same material, so you have time to really learn this well.  So get going on that (and we are here to help!), even as you also get going on your term projects (ditto!).
 
Here is the histogram of midterm2 grades:
 

 
Congrats again on the fine result!  And carpe diem!

David

2015 Facebook Hackathon Winners!!!!
Hey all.  Check out this video of the Facebook Hackathon Winners.  Go to 0:58 in.
 
And...  You'll see...
Current 112 student Tiffany Jiang
Recent 112 student Avi Romanoff
Current 112 CA Nikhil Choudhary
And CMU CS research intern (without 112 connections) Sumanth Pandugula.
 
And... THEY WON FIRST PLACE!!!!!  HUZZAH!!!!!!!!!
 
Congratulations, Tiffany, Avi, Nikhil, and Sumanth!!!!!

But first... Time for Monty Python and the Holy Grail!!!
The movie starts in 18 minutes, at 4:30pm, in Rashid Auditorium (GHC 4401).
 
<strong>Ni!!!!</strong>

David

Time for your TP's!!!
Hi all.  Congratulations on completing your second and last midterm for this course!!!  And now...  Onto the term projects!!!!
 
This is a really important time for you.  It's critical for you to rapidly shift gears and lean into your term projects, so you have a lot done before Thanksgiving.
 
History suggests that this is very important.
 
Even if you do work hard over TG break, which many of you will, most of you will do so away from CMU, away from all the supports for you here -- office hours, friends, the broader CMU community, etc.  It is definitely harder to make progress from afar than while you are physically here.
 
So, while you are physically here, have at it!  Make haste!  Make your TP come to life!!!

Good luck!  And have fun!  Really!

Carpe diem.

David

Globals on midterm, OH this week, Holy Grail, Puzzle Hunt, and more!
Hi all.  A few notes for today:
 
Globals are on the midterm!
In general, you should not use globals.  But there is one question on the midterm where globals are allowed and all but required.  The question spells this out clearly.  Just be sure to understand how to get and set a global variable from inside a function.

No Friday night OH this week
The CA's will all be grading your midterms then!  :-)

Friday Lab --> Optional TP OH
There are no more quizzes, so we will convert Friday's lab to an optional TP OH.  Stop by anytime, all day long, for TP help.

Monty Python tomorrow!
Reminder: Holy Grail, tomorrow, 4:30pm, GHC 4401 (Rashid Auditorium). 

Puzzle Hunt + Monty Python Saturday!
Reminder: Puzzle Hunt is on Saturday, starting at 1pm (more to be posted soon).  Also, another Monty Python screening Saturday at 6pm in DH 2315.

Use Python2 like Python3
For those of you who have to use Python2 for your TP due to some module restrictions, you can add this line to the top of your Python2 file and you'll get Python3-style division and Python3-style print functions:
from __future__ import print_function, division
Canopy Academic License (for easy opencv installation)
Canopy is a curated collection of Python modules that eases installation.  It's not a panacea (it can be big, and slow, and it makes it hard to add modules that they didn't think to add).  But it also can make it much easier to install and use opencv.  YMMV.  In any case, if you go this route, to enable opencv downloading, you'll have to use the Canopy Academic License (get this as a first step, before downloading Canopy at all).   It can be hard to find the link to this on their website, so here it is:
https://store.enthought.com/#canopy-academic

Carpe diem, and good luck tomorrow!

David

15-112 Screening of "Monty Python and the Holy Grail" (Thu, 4:30pm, GHC 4401) (Sat, 6pm, DH 2315)
Hi all.  Ever wonder why Python is called Python (Hint: Monty Python)?  Why IDLE is called IDLE (Hint: Eric Idle).  Ever wonder why we use 42 all the time (whoops, wrong book, but still, here's why).
 
Getting back to the point, Python is Python because of Monty Python.

To celebrate this fact, and to celebrate you completing the last 15-112 hw and last 15-112 midterm of your lives (well, for nearly all of you)...
 
We will host a screening of "Monty Python and the Holy Grail".  Actually, since no one time worked well for everyone, we'll do it twice.  I recommend attending both, actually, though your mileage may vary.  Seriously, this stuff is either side-splittingly, pee-your-pants funny, or it's deeply offensive without a shred of humor.  There's little in-between here.  So maybe peek at a clip or two at the links above to see which side of that fence you're on.
 
If you're still interested, we hope you join some CA's (and me, hopefully, at least for one screening) at one of these two times and locations:
 
* Post-Midterm, Thu, starting at 4:30pm, in Rashid Auditorium (GHC 4401)
 
or
 
* Post-Puzzle-Hunt, Sat, starting at 6pm, in DH 2315.
 
Either or both ways, should be good fun!
 
Enjoy!  And... 
 
Always look on the bright side of life!  (Same Python, different movie...)
 
David

TP Mentors (lottery completed)
Hi all. The TP Lottery is completed.  While there is no way we can accommodate every request (sorry), it turned out quite well, as nearly all of you got one of your top picks!  For those who did not get their preferred choice, we apologize, but we also cannot change mentor assignments.  But rest assured your mentor is wonderful (because they all are!).
 
In any case, you should be hearing from your assigned mentor this afternoon.
 
You are encouraged to meet with them soon to discuss tp1.  Sure, the tp1 deadline is a week away, but that week disappears in a blink.

Best of luck, and have fun!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

My OH this week (Wed 1:30-3, Thu noon-1:30, Fri 1:30-3)
Hi all.  Please note that my OH schedule this week is as follows (including none today, sorry, but some on Wed, Thu, and Fri):

  Wed:  1:30 - 3:00
 
  Thu:  noon - 1:30
 
  Fri:  1:30 - 3:00
 
Thanks.
 
David

Holy Grail / Puzzle Hunt / Thanksgiving Fun poll reminder (and good night!)
Hi all.  Quick reminder to please fill out this optional form today if you are interested in the Holy Grail movie, the upcoming Puzzle Hunt, or joining us on Thanksgiving Day.  See @3485 for details.
 
And good night!!!

David

Hw redux and kudos!
Hi all.  The last minutes of the last 15-112 hw deadline of the semester have passed!  You made it!
 

 
And here is a retrospective of the mountain you've climbed:
 
15-112 Fall 2015 Homework 1
Due Sunday, 6-Sep, at 10pm
A. 1-Hour CA-Led Practice Session [20 pts] 
B. Autograded Portion: Problem-Solving (Writing functions) 
nearestBusStop(street) [10 pts] 
setKthDigit(n, k, d) [10 pts] 
cosineZerosCount(r) [10 pts] 
riverCruiseUpstreamTime(totalTime, totalDistance, riverCurrent) [10 pts] 
rectanglesOverlap(left1, top1, width1, height1, left2, top2, width2, height2) [10 pts] 
threeLinesArea(m1, b1, m2, b2, m3, b3) [30 pts] 
lineIntersection(m1, b1, m2, b2)
distance(x1, y1, x2, y2)
triangleArea(s1, s2, s3)
Bonus/optional: findIntRootsOfCubic(a,b,c,d) [3 pts]
 
15-112 Fall 2015 Homework 2
Due Sunday, 13-Sep, at 10pm
Happy Numbers [25 pts]
sumOfSquaresOfDigits(n)
isHappyNumber(n)
nthHappyNumber(n)
nthHappyPrime(n)
nearestKaprekarNumber(n) [25 pts]
nthCarolPrime(n) [25 pts]
integral(f, a, b, N) [25 pts]
Bonus/Optional: carrylessMultiply(x, y) [2 pts]
Bonus/Optional: play112 (The 112 Game) [3 pts]
 
15-112 Fall 2015 Homework 3
Due Sunday, 20-Sep, at 10pm
patternedMessage(message, pattern) [20 pts]
encodeRightLeftCipher(message, rows) [20 pts]
decodeRightLeftCipher(encodedMessage) [20 pts]
bestStudentAndAvg(gradebook) [20 pts]
topLevelFunctionNames(code) [20 pts]
Bonus/Optional: getEvalSteps(expr) [2 pts]
Bonus/Optional: bonusDecode [3 pts; 1 pt each]
Bonus/Optional: bonusDecode1(msg) [1 pt]
Bonus/Optional: bonusDecode2(msg) [1 pt]
Bonus/Optional: bonusDecode3(msg) [1 pt]
 
15-112 Fall 2015 Homework 4 
Due Monday, 28-Sep, at 10pm
lookAndSay(a) [15 pts] 
inverseLookAndSay(a) [15 pts] 
solvesCryptarithm(puzzle, solution) [20 pts] 
bestScrabbleScore(dictionary, letterScores, hand) [20 pts] 
runSimpleProgram(program, args) [30 pts] 
Bonus/Optional: linearRegression(a) [2.5 pts] 
Bonus/Optional: bogusDataFinder(csvData) [2.5 pts]
 
15-112 Fall 2015 Homework 5 
Due Monday, 5-Oct, at 10pm
isMagicSquare(a) [20 pts] 
isKingsTour(board) [20 pts] 
isLegalSudoku(board) [25 pts] 
areLegalValues(values) [5 pts]
isLegalRow(board, row) [5 pts] 
isLegalCol(board, col) [5 pts] 
isLegalBlock(board, block) [5 pts] 
isLegalSudoku(board) [5 pts]
makeWordSearch(wordList, replaceEmpties) [35 pts] 
Bonus/Optional: makeBetterWordSearch(wordList) [2.5 pts] 
Bonus/Optional: playBattleship(rows, cols, ships, makeMoveFn) [2.5 pts]
 
15-112 Fall 2015 Homework 6 
Due Sunday, 11-Oct, at 10pm
s15 quiz1 and quiz2 [20 pts] 
Better Big Oh [20 pts] 
invertDictionary(d) [20 pts] 
sparseMatrixAdd(sm1, sm2) [20 pts] 
friendsOfFriends(d) [20 pts] 
Bonus/Optional: 3-Way Mergesort [1.5 pts] [manually graded (not autograded)]
 
15-112 Fall 2015 Homework 7 
Both parts are due Sunday, 18-Oct, at 10pm
playTetris() [30 pts] [COLLABORATIVE] 
hw7b splash screen and modes [10 pts] [SOLO]
drawCirclePattern [10 pts] [SOLO]
drawSpiral [10 pts] [SOLO]
adaptedSnake [20 pts] [SOLO]
betterSideScroller [20 pts] [SOLO]
bonus/optional: betterSnake [up to 2pts] [SOLO]
bonus/optional:sokoban [up to 3pts] [SOLO]
bonus/optional:Dots and Boxes [up to 3pts] [SOLO]
 
15-112 Fall 2015 Homework 8 
Both parts are due Sunday, 1-Nov, at 10pm
5-Minute TP Meetings [10pts] [manually graded]
OOPy Circuit Simulator [50 pts] [manually graded]
Bonus/Optional: 3d Tetris [5 pts, manually graded]
recursive nthLeftTruncatablePrime [10 pts] [autograded] 
recursive carrylessAdd [10 pts] [autograded] 
recursive longestDigitRun [10 pts] [autograded] 
recursive longestSubpalindrome [10 pts] [autograded]
 
15-112 Fall 2015 Homework 9 
Due Sunday, 8-Nov, at 10pm
findLargestFile(path) [20 pts]
flatten(L) [20 pts]
findRTP(digits) [15 pts]
getCourse(courseCatalog, courseNumber) [20 pts]
hFractal() [20 pts]
@noError decorator [5 pts]
bonus/optional: solveSudoku(board) [up to 3 pts]
bonus/optional: runSudokuoSolver() [up to 2 pts]
 
15-112 Fall 2015 Homework 10 (the last!) 
Due Sunday, 15-Nov, at 10pm
solveRectangula(board) [50 pts]
OopyInvaders (with inheritance) [50 pts]
 
 

 
Congratulations, and carpe diem.

David

3 Polls: Post-midterm Movie, 15-112 Puzzle Hunt, TG fun! (Due today!)
Hi all.  Please fill out this optional form today if you are interested in any or all of the following optional events.  We'll book rooms and buy food and such based on your responses, so please do let us know if you wish to attend:
 
Post-Midterm Movie
It will most likely be "Monty Python and the Holy Grail", btw (as Monty Python is the actual basis for the Python programming language's name).  The humor in this movie is not for everyone, and in any case is for a mature audience.  Please do not attend if you would take offense at this sort of humor.

The 15-112 Puzzle Hunt (Sat 21-Nov, 2-6pm)
This Saturday, 21-Nov, from 2pm to 6pm, we'll have the 15-112 Puzzle Hunt.  Our CA's have worked very hard to put together a collection of fun, 15-112-related puzzles for you to solve in this time.  The puzzles are designed so everyone can participate, regardless of your grade in the course.  They favor teamwork and cleverness over raw programming skill.  In any case, this should be great fun!

15-112 TG Fun (Thanksgiving Day, Thu 26-Nov)
On Thanksgiving Day (Thu 26-Nov), for those who are here on campus that day, we can get together around late morning (11am or later) or midday for lunch and perhaps a movie or some flag football or soccer or capture the flag or who-knows-what.  The point of Thanksgiving is to share with your friends, family, and community.  And you are just that, so let's share some fun!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Reminder: TP Mentor Sign-Up Form (now is a fine time to fill it out!)
TP Mentor Sign-Up Form (due Monday at noon!, but now is a fine time to fill it out!)
Please fill out this form to request your TP Mentor.  Tomorrow afternoon we'll run a lottery based on your preferences and assign mentors.  We'll do our best to give everyone one of their top 3 choices!
 
Some thoughts on hw10
Hi all.  So while some of you breezed through all of hw10 in <5 hours, for many others it is turning out to be quite a bit more challenging than that.
 
A few thoughts for those of you in the throes of rectangula or OopyInvaders (or both):
 
Semi-relaxed grading
The only pathway to a 90+ on hw10 is to get it working at an A level.  But we'll be generous with partial credit for this hw, so even if code is not quite working right, so long as we see serious effort and something approaching the right idea, you'll still get plenty of points on the hw.  So you can take some comfort in knowing that you are not at risk of scoring anything like a 50 or less after investing so many hours into this.

Don't invest too much time, really
If you can't get this working perfectly in 10 hours or thereabouts, stop, submit what you've got, and you'll be fine.  Go to the solution sessions this week to see how we would solve it, and learn from there.  Don't put 20+ hours into this hw. That's noble effort (truly), but still, it's just not worth it.

Don't worry about OopyInvaders UI
The video said we don't really care much about the UI, and we don't.  True, it has to work, so there's that, but plain ol' circles are good enough (so long as different kinds of monsters look different in some way, say in their color).  Keep it simple.

Don't worry if you don't get every last feature
Sure, it's nice to perfect a hw, and if you have the time, do it!  So, for example, while you should try getting that class attribute to count the total # of games, it is most definitely not worth hours of your time to get it.  Simply invest the time you have, and that will be good enough here.

You are so very close to being done!
In 3.5 hours (or in 27.5 hours for those using a grace/late day), the last deadline of the last 15-112 hw of the semester shall pass.  You are so close to being done.  Let's not panic and not get overly stressed and just try to finish strong.

You are doing great, regardless of hw10
The median overall right now is a super-strong 86+.  So you are collectively doing wonderfully.  Hw10 will not change that.  So, once more, let's keep calm and focused and balanced, and just do what we can given the time and energy we can reasonably invest into this.

Good luck with it.

Carpe diem!

David

A note to Rwanda students for TP Mentor signups
This is for our students in Rwanda,
 
Please do not fill out the form that was posted earlier today.  We'll send a different form to you next week.  Thanks.
 
David

TP Mentor Sign-Up Form (important, due Mon @ noon), hw10 stuff, quiz10 grades
Hi all.  I hope you find the time to enjoy the lovely sunny autumn day today!  With that, here are some key announcements for you:
 
TP Mentor Sign-Up Form (due Monday at noon!)
Please fill out this form to request your TP Mentor.  Tomorrow afternoon we'll run a lottery based on your preferences and assign mentors.  We'll do our best to give everyone one of their top 3 choices!

Hw10 grace day
Many of you have had questions about how the hw7+8 grace day oddness affects hw10.  Simple:  there were no grace days used by hw7+8, and your grace days available are precisely those that Autolab says are available.  Also, you only get a max of 1 grace day per hw, even if you have more available.

Hw10 monster/UFO across top of screen
Don't forget this!  :-)

Quiz10 grades
Quiz10 is graded (thanks, CA's!!!).  The median was 85, which is ok if not as strong as perhaps we would hope, given that the material was pre-released.  It's still not bad, though.  Even so, please be sure to study this material more in preparation for the upcoming midterm.  Also, please be sure to study OOP-part-2 for that, since it was not on any quiz, but it will be on the midterm.  In any case, here is the quiz10 grade distribution:


Weird Tkinter error
Many of you are noticing that you sometimes get a weird error, especially when you close a window or then open a new one, that looks something like this:
invalid command name "4338612296timerFiredWrapper"
    while executing
"4338612296timerFiredWrapper" This is a known Tkinter bug, and there's really not much or anything you can do about it.  So please just ignore it.  We will ignore it, too.  Not a problem.
 
Carpe diem.

David
 
Let's get more people here please!
Hi all.  Around 60 of you signed up for the Kinect Workshop, so Microsoft sent 2 engineers from Seattle to here to host it.  As of now, we have about 15 students in the room.
 
Ugh.
 
This is optional, of course, but it's not so optional to sign up for something and not show up!

For those of you who signed up: please get here asap.  Now, really.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Please show up *early* (at 12:30pm) to install software for Kinect Workshop
Hi all.  For those attending today's Kinect Workshop, if you have a Windows laptop with at least Windows 8 or later, and you have not already installed all the software required for today's Microsoft Kinect Workshop, then please show up at 12:30pm so that Andre and Rohan can walk you through the software setup.  It will take half an hour...
 
Thanks.

David

Food drive, hw10, quiz10x, football, aha!, py2app, Monte Carlo reprise, and more!
Hi all.  Some more announcements for this autumnal morning:
 
Food Drive results
Thanks to your tremendous kindness, 15-112 donated $455 plus many dozens of cans of food.  That contributes to hundreds of meals to those in need, for which I thank and commend all of you.  Details of our donation are available here (scroll down a bit).  Plus, here is an excerpt from the thank-you note we received (on your behalf, of course):

Thank you for donating to the 22nd Annual Carnegie Mellon Food Drive! Your gift will help make this a brighter, happier and healthier Thanksgiving for many of our neighbors. Your kindness makes a difference in the lives of those who would otherwise go without this Thanksgiving season. Your gift gives children, families, and seniors who are struggling with hunger a reason to be thankful as the holidays approach.

Hw10 has no autograder
Life does not have autograders (darn), and now, you no longer have or need them, either (sweet! kudos!).  None of hw10 is autograded, all of it is manually graded.  So the #ignore_rest line, for example, has no real meaning this week.  Plus, when you submit, there will be no autograded score or feedback at that time.

quiz10x grades are released
Median was 74.5, which is rock solid for an X quiz.  Good job!!!  Here is the distribution:


Big football game today, 1:30pm
For those not attending the Microsoft Kinect Workshop, there's also a big home game today!  Here's more info:  CMU_Packs_Gesling.pdf

The reason behind the "Take on Me" video
So I played Aha's "Take on Me" video before class and then forgot to explain why.  Sigh.  First, besides setting an upbeat mood for a quiz, it also helped reinforce that I am from the very ancient past.  :-)  Besides that, though, there was a very good reason for it.  As we approach TP season (well, we're in it, now!), everywhere I turn I see TP projects.  This is the poster child for that.  As explained here, this video combines live action with rotoscoping (explained here), where animation is drawn frame-by-frame directly over live action.  Well...  This is a great term project idea, to do this automatically for any video!!!!

py2app (to make standalone Mac executables)
The notes talked about py2exe which is a tool to convert a Python program into a standalone Windows executable (which is not at all required for your term project, but which some students still wish to do to make it easier to share their projects with other people).  There's another such tool for Macs, called py2app.  More info here.

Monte Carlo lecture reprise
We understand that some of you have Thanksgiving travel plans that will have you missing the required lecture on Monte Carlo Methods on Tue 24-Nov. On the one hand, you really should be on campus during required academic days.  On the other hand, well, ok...  We'll provide a CA-led reprise of that lecture on the following Monday, 30-Nov, in the evening, and if you attend the reprise you'll get quiz11 credit for having attended that lecture.  More details to be posted here soon.  We hope this helps you enjoy your holiday!

CRA Undergraduate Fall Student Survey
Tom Cortina (a dean here in CS) has asked us to forward this to you:
TomsCRAmessage.docx

Happy Birthday, Claude!
Today is Claude Monet's birthday!  :-)

 
Carpe diem!
 
David

Microsoft Kinect Workshop today + Pre-Workshop Software Installation Steps
Hi all.  The Microsoft Kinect Workshop (led by former 15-112 Head CA and current Microsoft engineer, Andre Sutanto) runs today from 1-5pm in WEH 7500.  Anyone who signed up can attend, and anyone else can, too, though if you did not sign up you should sit a bit further back and you might not get a physical Kinect device to use during the workshop (as we have a limited number of these).  Even so, you may attend, and you would probably find it useful and interesting!
 
Before you attend, if you have a Windows laptop, you should install the required software, according to these instructions:
    Pre_Workshop__Installation_Guide_112.pptx
 
Also, this is a public THANK YOU to Andre and the whole Microsoft team for providing this excellent learning opportunity specifically for 15-112 students.  Thanks!!!!
 
Enjoy!
 
And...  Carpe diem!
 
David

hw10 the rest
Hi all.  I'm in extended OH  and it's not looking like it will end soon, but we have to release the rest of hw10, so...
 
Here it is:
 
Write the OopyInvaders game described in this video.
 
In case it helps, here is the code at the end:
 
game1 = OopyInvaders()
game1.run()
print(game1.getFinalScore())

game2 = OopyInvaders()
game2.run()
print(game2.getFinalScore())

assert(OopyInvaders.totalGamesPlayed == 2)
 
Focus on the OOP parts, and make the UI just-good-enough to prove it works, as this is chiefly about OOP design and only partly about animations and UI.
 
Enjoy!

David

My OH (Thu 5:30-6:30, Fri 2:30-4:30)
Hi all.  Please note that I have to move my OH from its usual time tomorrow, and in fact split it into two parts:  Thu 5:30pm to 6:30pm, and then Fri 2:30pm to 4:30pm.
 
Hope to see you there!

David

hw10 pre-release (Rectangula!), food drive, quiz11
Hi all.  A few announcements for you:
 
hw10 pre-released (Rectangula!)
You can find it on the course website.  We made the problem lighter by giving you the UI and also the tester code, so you just have to write the backtracking solver.  Of course, that's still a non-trivial piece of work...  Also, be sure to very carefully read the writeup.  The hints should help a lot, but only if you read them carefully and understand them.  Enjoy!!!!

Food Drive tomorrow in class!
Remember to bring a can of food, or to bring $1 if you prefer (more is always welcome!), and Mark and I will match $1 for each student who donates.  Let's try to raise a bazillion dollars and help everyone have food security!!!

"Quiz11"
So you know:  there will be a "quiz11".  It's in quotes, since it's not a normal quiz, but it will count like a normal quiz in your semester grade.  You don't study for it.  You won't sit for it.  Instead, it will be determined by the minimum of these 3 items:

Attendance quiz
This is a 100-pt "quiz" where you get 25 points each for attending one of this week's CA-led sessions, and then each of the 3 post-midterm2 lectures.

TP1
This is the first term project deliverable (and not an actual quiz), which we will discuss in class tomorrow, and which is due Tuesday 24-Nov (the Tuesday before Thanksgiving).
TP2
This is the second term project deliverable (and also not an actual quiz), due Wednesday 2-Dec).

Carpe diem!

David

My OH today, your umbrella, and the installation blues
Hi all.  A few quick announcements:
 
My OH today
Please note that my OH today run from noon to 1:30pm (after which I will be covering lecture 2 today).  Thanks.

Your umbrella
Well, one of yours, anyhow.  Someone left an umbrella in my office yesterday.  I bet it would be handy today!

The installation blues (OH, not piazza)
Many of you are now facing the unfortunate reality that it can be really complicated, sometimes even impossible, to install the software packages that you want to use for your term projects.  Ugh.  The bad news:  piazza is just not the right place to help with these sorts of questions, as they nearly always require sitting with you at your particular laptop.  The good news: at CA's OH, we can usually help you get going.  The bad news:  but not always.  Sometimes, you have to abandon a package simply because you can't install it.  Sigh.  The good news: nearly always, there's another similar package available to use instead.
 
Carpe diem!

David

Reminder CA-led semi-optional lectures start now!
Attend at least 1 of your choosing (and there are some really fine choices!):
 
   Mon 6pm, DH 2315	Graph Algorithms (shortest path, etc)
   Mon 7pm, DH 2315	Web Scraping
   Mon 8pm, DH 2315	Using Databases with Python
   Mon 9pm, DH 2315	
Video Processing with OpenCV
   Tue 6pm, DH 2210	Functional Programming
   Tue 7pm, DH 2210	Multiplayer Games with Sockets
   Tue 8pm, DH 2210	Fair Division and the Prisoners' Dilemma
   Wed 6pm, MM A14	Mobile Python Development with Kivy
   Wed 7pm, MM A14	Speech Processing
   Wed 8pm, MM A14	NP-Completeness Redux (Reductions for P/NP)
   Wed 9pm, MM A14	Intro to Machine Learning
   Thu 6pm, DH A302	Image Manipulation in Tkinter
   Thu 7pm, DH A302	Delta Graphics in Tkinter
   Thu 8pm, DH A302	Options Pricing with Monte Carlo
   Thu 9pm, DH A302	Pygame
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

15-112 Food Drive is on Thursday, not Tuesday (whoops, sorry)
Hi all.  I was so enthusiastic about this, I forgot it has to be on Thursday, not Tuesday.  Sorry for the confusion, but the 15-112 Food Drive will be this Thursday, 12-Nov, in lecture.
 
And I also forgot to attach the official announcement, which is provided here:
 
15-112 Food Drive is tomorrow (Tue 10-Nov in class!) (Mark and I will dollar-match your donations!)
Hi all.  As you may know, this week is CMU's 22nd Annual Food Drive (see announcement below).  We hope you consider helping in this worthy cause.  To promote this, we are happy to host the First Annual 15-112 Food Drive, tomorrow (Tue 10-Nov) in class.
 
Please bring a donation of one canned or non-perishable item to lecture tomorrow.
 
We will deliver your donations to the two blue collection barrels located on the 1st floor of the Cohon University Center.
 
In addition, Mark and I will personally donate a "dollar match" of $1 per each student who donates in our respective lectures.
 
So let's get together and help support the Greater Pittsburgh Community Food Bank, and to provide food assistance for those in need.
 
Carpe diem!!!!

David

gradebook is current (hw7, hw8, and quiz9x released)
Hi all.  Please note the following:
 
Hw7 and hw8 grades are released
Woohoo!

Hw7 and hw8 grace+late day issue
We were never able to convince autolab to properly deal with grace and late days for these two assignments.  At this point, we have no choice but to move ahead anyhow.  And so:  no late or grace days will be assigned for hw7 or hw8.  There is no other realistic way to proceed.  Few people took such days, so this only affects a very small percentage of you anyhow.

hw9x grades are released
The median was a very solid 81.  Kudos!!!  Here is the distribution:


Gradebook is current
And with that, the gradebook is current with everything that is past the last-date-to-submit deadline (that is, everything except hw9, which can still be submitted up until 10pm tonight).
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
 
hw9: findLargestFile and decorator weirdness --> 10 submissions
Hi all.  Important:  some of you are struggling with some autograder weirdnesses with findLargestFile and @noError.  First, you should know that every single one of these issues has in the end been due to a student bug, not an autograder bug.  Even so, the autograder should not be so weird, so....
 
To help with this, you have 10 submissions.  This gives you some extra submissions to work the problem, plus a couple at the end to simply omit the non-working functions if it comes down to that.  Still, use these wisely.
 
Importantly, some findLargestFile errors are resulting in a 0 on the entire hw.  Ugh.  So for that, if you can't debug it, just use an extra submission to comment out your findLargestFile and thereby get the other points you deserve.
 
Also, for findLargestFile, you should know that listdir can return the files in any order, and on the autograder OS it is different from most Macs and PCs.  Also, getsize(path) can act differently on different OS's if path is a folder.  This is important since some student bugs behave differently on the autograder than on the student machines.  These are still bugs, mind you, but hard to find, since they don't appear on your machines.  In any case, avoid issues relating to misusing listdir or getsize as noted above.
 
Also, be sure not to include the phrase "ignore_rest" anywhere except in your actual #ignore_rest line.  Several of you had a problem because you included a comment above the #ignore_rest line saying something like "this is below the ignore_rest line".  The problem is that that line contains ignore_rest, so it IS the ignore_rest line, and everything below it is ignored!  Ugh.
 
I hope the extra submissions help.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

hw9: you can use iterative isPrime (fasterIsPrime), and (for partial credit) iteration in getCourse
Hi all.  There has been conflicting advice at OH and on piazza about this, so here is the definitive word:
 
You *can* use iterative isPrime (well, fasterIsPrime) for findRTP, so long as you use recursion meaningfully in your solution somewhere.
 
You can in fact use iteration everywhere, subject to that constraint.

Except...  The writeup for getCourse explicitly disallows this, saying "without using any iteration".  So, for full credit for getCourse (and only getCourse), you must use recursion to solve it, and yes, that includes all helper functions you might write for it.
 
That said, we will also provide partial credit for those who solve getCourse using some iteration, so long as you also of course use recursion meaningfully in your solution.
 
I hope this clears up any confusions.

Carpe diem.
 
David

hw9 autograder is live now
Note that the hw9 autograder does not verify that your solutions are recursive.  That will be done later by CA's.  So, it is possible that a non-recursive solution would get full points now, only to lose all the points later, since non-recursive solutions are not allowed on hw9.
 
Also, the autograder does not autograde hfractals, nor the bonus.
 
Good luck with it!

And... Carpe diem!

David

Please direct all grading inquiries to Anqi (acong)
Thanks.

David

hw9: run testNoErrorDecorator() as first test
Hi all.  Some of you are running into a strange bug where your REPL (not just your code, but the entire REPL) crashes when you add testNoErrorDecorator() to your test suite.
 
Ugh.
 
The problem:  once you use callWithLargeStack anywhere, from that point forward the stack overflow test in testNoErrorDecorator acts weird and crashes awfully, at least in some versions of Python on some OS's.
 
The fix (well, the band-aid that gets you through hw9): just run testNoErrorDecorator() as the first test, before you use callWithLargeStack.

Hope this helps.
 
David

Another weekend option: CMU Computer Club's Demosplash 2015
Hi all.  In addition to ScottyLab's WebDev weekend, and those other cultural activities, I should have mentioned this, that may be of interest to some 112 students:
 
CMU Computer Club's Demosplash 2015
 
Here is the event website:  http://www.demosplash.org/
 
Here is the schedule:  http://www.demosplash.org/schedule
 
CA-led semi-optional mini-lectures next week (attend at least 1)
Hi all.  Last post for a while...  :-)
 
This coming week, the CA's will lead a bunch of semi-optional mini-lectures.  They are semi-optional in that you have to attend at least 1, but you are encouraged to attend more.
 
The CA's have worked hard to create a great list of really interesting topics, many of which may help you with your term projects, but others of which are just darned interesting things to get to see.
 
The talks are one hour long.  They are like other optional/advanced lectures, in that they do not try to teach every little detail, but rather try to give you a high-level understanding of the topic.  Fun times!  :-)
 
Here are the topics and times:
 
CA-led Mini-Lectures (Attend any 1 of your choice):
   Mon 6pm	Graph Algorithms (shortest path, etc)
   Mon 7pm	Web Scraping
   Mon 8pm	Using Databases with Python
   Mon 9pm	Video Processing with OpenCV
   Tue 6pm	Functional Programming
   Tue 7pm	Multiplayer Games with Sockets
   Tue 8pm	Fair Division and the Prisoners' Dilemma
   Wed 6pm	Mobile Python Development with Kivy
   Wed 7pm	Speech Processing
   Wed 8pm	NP-Completeness Redux (Reductions for P/NP)
   Wed 9pm	Intro to Machine Learning
   Thu 6pm	Image Manipulation in Tkinter
   Thu 7pm	Delta Graphics in Tkinter
   Thu 8pm	Options Pricing with Monte Carlo
   Thu 9pm	Pygame
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Announcements du jour
Hi all.  A few more announcements for this lovely Friday evening:
 
hw9: no iteration on courseNotes
Despite the previous post about iteration, the writeup for courseNotes in particular says "without using any iteration", so...  No iteration there, just recursion.

hw7 grades are posted
Well, mostly.  We are struggling with autolab, and presently the late and grace days for hw7 are not posted.  Sorry.  But the rest of the grades are posted, including comments.  We are working with the autolab team to resolve this issue...

TP's:  make progress this weekend
Seeing how hw8 turned out, we made hw9 notably lighter than hw8.  You can use that spare time how you wish, but this is a fine weekend to make some headway on your term projects.  Also, don't forget to study the recursion examples for the upcoming hw10 and hw10x!

TP's: no CA shopping
Please do not shop around for the CA who has the most experience with whatever your TP topic or technologies are.  We discourage this behavior, plus it is not effective, since the whole point of a term project is for you to work largely on your own.  So CA's will not provide too much guidance.   They will help get you unstuck when you are stuck, and will help make sure you are on the right track.  But any CA can do that.  They will not provide too much direct assistance, so CA shopping for term projects has no value...

Fun stuff this weekend!
There are a bunch of fun things going on this weekend.  Here are but a few...

ScottyLabs WebDev Weekend (Sat and Sun afternoons)
This may interest many of you:  https://scottylabs.org/wdw/

Football vs UChicago (noon tomorrow)
We have some football players in 112.  They are having a fine season, and if they win out, they can perhaps play in the postseason.  Here is the schedule, for those who will go cheer them on:
http://athletics.cmu.edu/sports/fball/2015-16/schedule
Bhangra in the Burgh (tomorrow night)
We have several 112 members involved in this fun event!  Here is the info:
https://www.facebook.com/events/1153987164614898/
 
Carpe diem!

David

Some mostly-small but important edits to course notes and hw9
Hi all.  Please carefully note the following:
 
Course notes edit:  os.sep --> "/"
We used os.sep in our listFiles and printFiles examples, but this led to some confusion since os.sep is different on Macs than Windows.  So, instead, we replaced os.sep with "/".  Python will do the right thing on either Macs or Windows with "/".  Also, this allows the hw9 asserts to pass on both platforms.  So please use "/" instead of os.sep.

Course notes:  Added the term "Closures" to non-local variables example
We should have used this term in lecture: "closures".  A closure is formed when you have a non-local variable.  For 112 purposes, you can think of "closure" as a synonym for "non-local variable".  So it is not global, and not local, either.

Course notes:  posted Functions Redux examples
Enjoy!  :-)

hw9: no listFiles in findLargestFile
This is an important clarification.  Note that it's not a change, per se, as we would have graded it this way in any case.  But you should know how we would grade this, so this text was added: "regarding efficiency, it is overtly inefficient to create a list of files, say using listFiles. So you may not use listFiles here. Instead, you must compute the largestFile as you go, though perhaps returning it in a tuple to a wrapper function, as the previous note suggests."

hw9: loops are ok
You may use iteration (for + while loops), but only if you use recursion
meaningfully (except the decorator problem, where neither is required).

hw9: avoid stack overflow in findRTP
Hint: you may need to use callWithLargeStack so your isPrime does not stack 
overflow.

hw9: findLargestFile and ties
Finally: you may resolve ties as you wish.

Hope this helps, and good luck with hw9.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Reminder: no quiz today, instead, optional OH in 5208
Hi all.  Just a quick reminder that we are not having a quiz today, and instead, all day long we'll run optional OH in GHC 5208.  We encourage you to stop by during your assigned time, or any other time, to chat with a CA about recursion, about hw9, about your term project ideas, about whether or not the universe is expanding, or pretty much anything at all.
 
Hope this helps, and happy Friday!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Functions Redux code from class today
Hi all.  I am still in student meetings and so may not get to post this until late tonight or early tomorrow morning, so here is the functions redux code from class today:
 
# Default args

def f(x, y=10): return (x,y)
print(f(5))   # (5, 10)
print(f(5,6)) # (5, 6)

# Do not use mutable default args

def f(x, L=[ ]):
    L.append(x)
    return L

print(f(1))
print(f(2)) # why is this [1, 2]?

# Variable length args (*args)

def longestWord(*args):
    if (len(args) == 0): return None
    result = args[0]
    for word in args:
        if (len(word) > len(result)):
            result = word
    return result

print(longestWord("this", "is", "really", "nice")) # really

mywords = ["this", "is", "really", "nice"]

print(longestWord(mywords))  # ['this', 'is', 'really', 'nice']
print(longestWord(*mywords)) # really

# Keyword args (**kwargs)

def f(x=1, y=2): return (x,y)
print(f()) # (1, 2)
print(f(3)) # (3, 2)
print(f(y=3)) # (1, 3) [here is where we use a keyword arg]

def f(x, **kwargs): return (x, kwargs)
print(f(1)) # (1, { })
print(f(2, y=3, z=4)) # (2, {'z': 4, 'y': 3})

# functions as parameters

def derivative(f, x):
    h = 10**-8
    return (f(x+h) - f(x))/h

def f(x): return 4*x + 3
print(derivative(f, 2)) # about 4

def g(x): return 4*x**2 + 3
print(derivative(g, 2)) # about 16 (8*x at x==2)

# lambda functions

print(derivative(lambda x:3*x**5 + 2, 2)) # about 240, 15*x**4 at x==2

myF = lambda x: 10*x + 42
print(myF(5)) # 92
print(derivative(myF, 5)) # about 10

# functions inside functions

def f(L):
    def squared(x): return x**2
    return [squared(x) for x in L]
print(f(range(5)))
try:
    print(squared(5))
except:
    print("squared is not defined outside f")

# non-local variables

def f(L):
    myMap = dict()
    def squared(x):
        result = x**2
        myMap[x] = result
        return result
    squaredList = [squared(x) for x in L]
    return myMap
print(f(range(5)))

# non-local variables fail on setting (use nonlocal)

def f(L):
    lastX = 0
    def squared(x):
        result = x**2
        lastX = x
        return result
    squaredList = [squared(x) for x in L]
    return lastX
print(f(range(5)))

def f(L):
    lastX = 0
    def squared(x):
        nonlocal lastX
        result = x**2
        lastX = x
        return result
    squaredList = [squared(x) for x in L]
    return lastX
print(f(range(5)))

# functions that return functions

def derivativeFn(f):
    def g(x):
        h = 10**-5
        return (f(x+h) - f(x))/h
    return g

def f(x): return 5*x**3 + 10
fprime1 = derivativeFn(f)
fprime2 = derivativeFn(fprime1)
print(f(3))    # 145, 5*x**3 + 10 evaluated at x == 3
print(fprime1(3)) # about 135, 15*x**2 evaluated at x == 3
print(fprime2(3)) # about 90, 30*x evaluated at x == 3

# decorators

@derivativeFn
def h(x): return 5*x**3 + 10
print(h(3)) # 135, matches fprime1 from above.
 
Carpe diem.

David

hw9 is posted
Good luck and have fun!  And please do find the time to really study the recursion notes, and to really practice writing the worked examples from scratch.  This stuff is hard, and that is the only way you'll learn it, and to be sure that you know that you know it.
 
Practice, practice, practice.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Please fill out CA Review forms soon (now is a great time!) (thanks!)
Hi again.  Here is the CA Review form.  Your feedback is vital, and we take it all very much to heart.
 
I ask that you please take a few minutes now to fill out some CA Review forms.
 
You can find the form here.


David
 
PS: Here is the form!

Awesome job! Let's keep at it!
HI again.  As we approach the end of the core material, with just a few more lectures before midterm2 and the term projects, I would like to commend you all again on your great work so far.  You have created a wonderful positive learning environment, with excellent collaboration, strong use of resources, low cheating and stress rates, historically lower OH queues and time-on-task, and historically higher exam results.  That is truly a winning combination!!!! Kudos!!!
 
As for those of you who are still struggling, don't fret.  That is also common even at this stage of the course.  Just keep your balance, put in as much effort as you can (but no more, of course), get your sleep, and exercise, and socialize, and generally take care of yourself, and use your resources wisely (my OH, CA's OH, small-group and large-group sessions, additional tutoring, and now peer tutoring, etc).  This will come together, and in time for your term projects, which is where you can really shine.  Also, AMG is your friend, and with AMG, all but just a few of you will pass the course with at least a C, even if your current grade is well below that.  So you are fine.  Just keep at it.  Also, of course, Mark and I are both happy to meet to discuss your situation and how you can be most effective moving forward.  Your CA's are happy to do this as well.  So you are not alone, and we are here to help.
 
Carpe diem!

David

3 optional polls due today (CA Reviews, Peer Tutoring, Kinect Workshop)
Hi all.  Here are 3 optional polls that we hope you fill out today:  CA Reviews, Peer Tutoring, and Kinect Workshop.
 
Optional CA Reviews (form here)
We care very much about your opinions. They help us understand what is working well and where we can improve the experience both for you and for future 112 students. At this point of the semester, we focus on reviewing individual CA's. Please fill out this optional form once per each CA you wish to review. And we ask that you please be constructive with your feedback. In any case, again, we very much welcome your opinions, and do hope you provide them to us. Thanks, and.... Carpe diem!

Optional Peer Tutoring (form here)
In addition to our faculty-led and CA-led tutoring, each semester we help organize student-to-student peer tutoring services for this course, as another resource to help you learn this material as well as possible. This is entirely optional, though we encourage you to participate, either as a tutor as as a tutee (one being tutored). Note that this is not meant for hw help, and would not be appropriate for that purpose. This is meant to help you learn the material better, to prepare for quizzes, midterms, and finals, and for what lies beyond this semester. We hope you share that goal! Let's be a strong community of learners, and band together to help each other learn this as well as possible!
We would expect participants to invest about 1-2 hours per week in this. If you are interested, please fill out this form today, whether as a possible tutor or tutee (seeking tutoring). While there is no specific grade cutoff for peer tutors, we would expect that tutors would have a reasonably strong understanding of the material, which presumably means a strong A hw average and at least a strong B or higher on midterm1.

Optional Kinect Workshop Signup (form here)
On Sat 14-Nov, time TBD, Andre Sutanto (former Head CA of 15-112, now at Microsoft) will lead a workshop specifically designed to show 15-112 students how to program the Kinect. Space is limited, and so we may have to lottery who can attend (we'll post back soon with details). In any case, please fill out this form if you plan to attend (knowing that the time is not yet determined, but still, please be sure to attend if you fill out this form).
Thanks, and have fun!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

code from class, quiz9x, quiz10+10x, Friday plan, YHacks, ThanksGiving Back-a-thon!
Hi all.  Here are a bunch of announcements:
 
Code from class (updated recursion examples)
Chiefly due to all the TP meetings (dozens of them, and so many great ideas!!!), I may not be able to post the nicely-formatted of these examples in the course outline until tomorrow (sorry).  For now, though, here is a zip file of all the examples from today's notes, along with those we'll cover on Thursday:
recursionexamples.zip
To run the listFiles-and-printFiles example, you need to first unzip the sampleFiles.zip folder.

quiz9x on Thursday
As we discussed today, quiz9x is on Thursday in lecture.  It is an "x-style" quiz, and covers everything comprehensively through hw8.  So everything up to but not including today's material.  Of course, it will probably focus heavily on the post-midterm1 material (animations, oop, recursion).

No quiz9 on Friday
There is no quiz9, just quiz9x this week.

Friday lab --> optional TP support
Friday's labs are optional this week.  Stop in any time all day long and talk to CA's about your TP's (term projects).  Great chance to get some great help!!!!

Quiz10 and Quiz10x next week
Next week, we will have both a quiz10x on Thursday and also a quiz10 on Friday.  The latter will be on verbatim or near-verbatim portions of the recursion part 2 examples (those in the zip file above).  So study them thoroughly, and be sure you can easily write any part of any of them from scratch!  This includes the non-recursive parts, such as how we create a maze.

YHacks this weekend!
Those who are going should let us know so we can give you an extension on hw9.  And good luck!  And have fun!!!

ThanksGiving Back-a-thon
Are you going to be around campus over Thanksgiving?  If so, this sounds like a lovely way to spend your time:  Giving_Back_Full_Poster.pdf
Gobble gobble!!!
 
Carpe diem!

David

Some hw8 (and hw7) announcements
Hi all.  Busy night... Great to see everyone working hard and making solid progress on this challenging material.  Kudos!  And with that, a few announcements:
 
run and extra submissions
The autograder routinely disallows tokens, such as "while" and "for" in hw8b.  Well, in hw8a it disallowed "run", to help prevent students accidentally submitting the wrong hw to the wrong part.  Well, that confused people and should have been announced anyhow.  Whoops. Sorry about the confusion.  To help, we added +3 submissions for both hw8a and hw8b.  So....

8 submissions for each part of hw8
You all get up to 8 submission for each of hw8a and hw8b.   Hope this helps.

Place all graphics + animations (including import) below #ignore_rest line
The autograder does not have Tkinter installed, so if you import Tkinter above the #ignore_rest line, your code will necessarily crash and you will score 0.  So... Don't do that!  Place all your graphics + animation code, including the import line, below the #ignore_rest line!

You may not use eval or exec
This is always true.  It's just an awful habit to get into, leaving yourself and your code exposed to serious security risks.  So don't do it!

Plan to attend hw8 solution sessions on Wed/Thu nights!
We are seeing a wide range of solutions, some wonderful, some less so, and some showing some serious conceptual issues.  For now, with the hw deadline looming, just try to get your code working as best you can.  But for maximal learning, on this hw especially, I think many of you even with high hw8 scores would do well to attend one of the solution sessions this week.  Your mileage may vary, but that's our strong recommendation.

Hw7 grades
For a brief while, autolab was showing that everyone scored a 0 on hw7.  Rest assured this is not so.  We have resolved the matter.  Sorry for the confusion!  :-)
 
Carpe diem!

David

hw8 autograder + Halloween treats
Hi all.  The hw8a and hw8b autograders are live.  The astute may notice that these are in the "etc" category.  Yes, but their summed score will appear as hw8 in the "hw" category!  Also, note that the hw8a autograder will only check that you passed the exact 5 test functions we provided for you!  The rest of hw8a is manually graded.  Also, remember that each part of hw8 consumes its own late day and/or grace day.
 
Also, here are some Halloween treats for you:
 
Everyone has 1 more Grace Day.  So now you have 4 for the semester.  You may use it for hw8, or anywhere else.  Of course, we added it now as we anticipate many of you may wish to use a grace day this week, but it is usable as any other grace day.

Each part of hw8 has a late penalty of only 5 points instead of the usual 10.
 
A good plan would probably be to get hw8b submitted on time by tomorrow night for sure, and then see how far you get with hw8a, using the extra grace day and/or reduced late day penalty as needed.  In any case, the late deadline of Monday at 10pm remains true for both parts.
 
We hope this helps you enjoy Halloween.  Seriously, get out and have some fun, even on this super busy weekend.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw8 circuit saving: No pickle or JSON / make your own file format for your circuits
Hi all.  Some of you are asking if you can use pickle or JSON or some other way for Python to automagically convert your circuits into something that can be stored in a file.
 
That will not be allowed on hw8.
 
The point is for you to think about how you would do this:  how to convert the state in a circuit into text, so that it can be stored in a plaintext file, and then how to convert that back from text into a new circuit that you display and that the user can interact with.
 
You don't have to think of an amazingly clever format, but you must make your own format, and not use pickle, or JSON, or any other such pre-packaged solution.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

hw8 hints, hanoi, quiz8, one-liners, social conscience links, and flu shots!
Hi all.  A few notes here for your Saturday viewing pleasure...
 
hw8: optional parameters
You may add optional parameters to any method or function that you wish.

hw8: the first parameter to setInputValue
A bunch of you have asked what that None is doing as the first parameter to setInputValue.  That is the gate that is providing that input value.  For "input" gates, their values do not come from other gates, so that value is None.  But if you connect gate1 to gate2, then when the output of gate1 changes, it has to call setInputValue on gate2, and it provides itself in place of None as the first parameter, so gate2 knows which input to set (since it may have more than one input). 

hanoi parameter name changes
Some astute observers have noticed that changed the names of the parameters in the online notes for the Towers of Hanoi.  Instead of "from", "via", and "to", we are using "source", "temp", and "target".  Same problem, different (hopefully clearer) names, that's all.  :-)

quiz8 results
Quiz8 grades are in autolab (thanks, CA's!!!).  The results were super-solid, with a median of 97.8.  Here is the histogram:

Great job, everyone!

One-liner web app
Thanks to an astute student, check out this fun/cool/interesting web app that takes arbitrary Python code and converts it into an equivalent piece of Python that is a single line of code.  Cool!

Coding with a Social Conscience links
Many of you have asked, so you can find those Coding with a Social Conscience links here.  There are many great opportunities for you to make a real contribution to the world now, today, based on the skills you have already acquired in 112.  And if none of these float your boat, that's fine, find what does.  Find what matters to you, and then find a way to help, in a way that you enjoy, in a way that is meaningful to you.

Get your flu shot!
Getting a cold or some other bug can be disruptive, but nothing like getting the flu, which can really put a serious dent in a semester.  So don't let it happen!  Get your flu shot!  There is a free flu shot clinic for students, this Wed, 4-Nov, 10am to 2pm, at the CUC.  Here is the info flyer.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw8 is fully posted, due Sunday 10pm
Good luck!  Have fun! 
 
Carpe diem!

David

quiz8-practice released
Hi all.  Here is quiz8-practice.  It is no surprise:  exactly the material from Tuesday's lecture and then today's recitation.  It is worth practicing that extensively for Friday's quiz, and to help prepare for hw8.
 
Good luck with it, and enjoy!

Carpe diem.
 
David

hw8 pre-release
Hi all.  For those wanting a jump on hw8, here is a good part of it: we will do all the problems from s15 hw8b.  That's just part b of that hw, which specifically means these 4 problems:
 
nthLeftTruncatablePrime (recursive, no iteration)
carrylessAdd (recursive, no iteration)
longestDigitRun (recursive, no iteration)
longestSubpalindrome (recursive, no iteration)
 
This is due Sunday at 10pm, as normal.
 
Enjoy!

David

Stop Hunger Now event, Nov 7th, 11am-1pm, Wiegand Gym (UC)
Hi all.  I have been asked to share this with you.
David

APT Tech Talk (meet two former 112 Head CA's, eat cookies and Chipotle, do social good!!!!)
Please see below.  Margaret and Jordan are both former 112 Head CA's.  They are awesome.  And many former 112 CA's work at APT now, for what it's worth.

The food will be good, too!  And we always encourage you to consider how you might do some Social Good with your newfound coding skills.

Carpe diem.

David

Course shutdown until Tuesday
Hi again.  As of this minute, 15-112 is now officially and fully on hiatus.  That means:  no office hours, no recitations, no lectures, no piazza, no emails, no homeworks, no quizzes, no large group sessions, no small group sessions, no optional lectures, no nothing.
 
It is midsemester break, and by gosh you have seriously earned it.  So take it.
 
Enjoy your time off.  And come back with your batteries charged.  We've climbed half the mountain, but the other half lies just ahead.

Carpe diem.
 
David

Midterm and midsemester grades
Hi all.  Thanks to the CA's herculean efforts (thanks, CA's!!!!), the midterms are all graded.  The results were.... (drumroll please)....  Wonderful!!!!  The median score on the midterm was an 81.  This is rock solid!  In fact, this midterm was designed to be closely correlated to last semester's in scores, and you outscored them by a full 2.5 points, which is quite a lot, actually.  GREAT JOB!!!!!  And you did it with less time on task (though, yes, you worked very hard), shorter OH queues, and less overall stress.  All great things.  Kudos!!!!!
 
Your midterm grades are entered into Autolab.
 
Also....  Mark and I just entered your midsemester grades into FIO (and it will make its way into SIO any time now).  These grades are based on the weights for hw's, quizzes, and midterms as noted in the syllabus, but weighted to account for us not having a final or term projects yet.  The results were again rock-solid, with fully 38% of you receiving A's and 3/4ths of you receiving A's or B's.  That's great!!!!  Here is the distribution:
 


Congratulations!!!!
 
David
 
My OH today (noon to 1:30pm)
Hi all.  Please note that my OH will run from noon to 1:30pm today.

Thanks, and good luck today!!!!
 
David

Leather jacket from lecture 1 today
Hi all.   Someone left a leather jacket in one of the front rows of lecture 1 today.  It is in my office.  Please claim it if it is yours.
 
There is also a light blue water bottle that someone left here, btw.  :-)
 
David

Roboclub Hackathon opportunity for 112 students (tonight to Saturday morning!)
Hi all.  Please see the post below from Adam Zeloof from the CMU Roboclub.  It's a really cool opportunity if you have the time and will be around campus the next few days.  I hope a few of you do it!!!
 
David

Hour of Code local leadership opportunities
Hi all.  You may have heard of "Hour of Code".  The post below (from the ACM) describes ways that you can get involved, helping others or even creating your own local leadership opportunities, to bring Hour of Code to your a school and/or community nearby CMU, or perhaps from your hometown, or elsewhere.  Note that there are dozens and dozens of local schools and municipalities, so the opportunities far exceed the supply of local leaders to help make this happen across all of Southwest PA.
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

MongoDB Tech Talk 5:30pm tomorrow by former 112-Head-CA Charlie Swanson!!!
Hi all.  Before Anqi and Rudina, there was Jordan.  And before Jordan, there was Charlie!!!!  And now Charlie will be here tomorrow giving what promises to be a really interesting Tech Talk for MongoDB.
 
Details here.  Plus, as Charlie notes, there will be free pizza.  :-)
 
I hope some of you take a break from your midterm studies (or whatever else you may be up to) and attend.  It should be good fun and really interesting.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

My OH this week (Wed 5-6pm, Thu 12-1:30pm)
Hi all.  Please note that I will not have OH tomorrow, but I will have Wednesday OH from 5-6pm (and perhaps a bit later), and then Thu from noon to 1:30pm.
 
Thanks.
 
David

hw7 issues / GE Digital videos / Offline / Good luck!
Hi all.  A few notes on this Saturday morning:
 
Hw7c and hw7s submissions are open
There is no autograder this week, but you still submit to autolab, and you may start doing so now.  Please submit Tetris to hw7c (for collaborative) and then submit the rest of the hw to hw7s (for solo).  Thanks.

Unspecified == your choice
Any behavior that is unspecified is left to you to decide.  For example, should your side-scroller have infinite walls?  You need to make reasonable decisions, though.  For example, having infinite walls is a good decision.  So is having, say, 50 walls.  But having only one wall is not.  What is "reasonable"?  Yes, that is subjective, and once we grade open-ended designs our grading necessarily becomes more subjective.  We'll take a broad view of your design in grading, so don't stress, but do make good design decisions.

Oval-rectangle intersections
In the side-scroller, you are not required to do complicated oval-rectangle intersections -- that is, it is ok to test for intersections using the bounding box around the oval.  That's not so pretty, though, since you will detect hits that the player might think are not really hits.  So you can optionally fix this.  Since true oval-rectangle hit detection is hard, you can approximate it as so (courtesy of Christine):  a good way to do oval-rectangle collision detection for the case where the edge of the wall is approaching the oval is to check if the top-left point of the wall is inside the oval. You can do that with the mathematical definition of an oval:
    ((cx - x)/rx)**2 + ((cy - y)/ry)**2 <= 1
Where (cx, cy) is the center of the oval, (rx, ry) are the horizontal and vertical radii, and (x,y) is the point you're trying to check. You can read more about it here!

No hw7 bonus pts for Tetris
The last step of Tetris lists possible bonus.  But these are for your edification ("life bonus points"), not for bonus points on hw7.  If you want to do bonus on hw7, do some of the interesting problems in hw7s.

Test functions for non-view (non-drawing) functions
You are not responsible for test functions for view functions, but you are still responsible for test functions where they can be more easily provided.  For example, a function that removes full rows could presumably be automatically tested, right?

GE Digital videos
If you are looking for a quick somewhat humorous break, some folks from GE Digital chatted with us recently.  They are looking for ways to interact more with CMU students, and 112 students in particular, to give you more awareness of them by creating some fun learning opportunities for you (say, the way Microsoft has a Kinect Workshop designed just for 112 students (that's coming soon)).  Anyhow, sort of related to that, they have these 3 videos they made to help get the word out that GE Digital is a new take on the old-school GE image.  Here are the videos:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OpDIEJrog3s
 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3xGoBlI_fdg
 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OvfU1NpCJQQ

I am now offline until Monday
Well, by the time you read this at least, I will be offline attending my son's college's Parent's Weekend.  Fun times!  I will be back online on Monday morning.  Meanwhile, of course, the 112 team is here to support you throughout hw7 (thanks, CA's!).  And you can direct any faculty-related 112 issues to Mark (mjs@cs.cmu.edu) (thanks, Mark!).  And good luck with hw7!
 
Carpe diem!

David

Clarifying drawCirclePattern and drawSpiral confusions
Hi all.  There's been some confusion on these problems, so let's clarify (chiefly by relaxing the specs):
 
Q: Do we draw one picture or two at a time for drawCirclePattern and/or drawSpiral?
A: Your choice.
 
Q: Do we change the colors in drawSpiral for different size drawings, and if so, how?
A: Your choice.  Yes is fine and no is fine, and if you do, any which way is fine.
 
Q: <Insert reasonable question here>
A: Your choice, so long as you are within <insert large epsilon here> of the spec, we will grade these particular questions liberally.
 
Q: So we can pretty much submit anything and get all the points?
A: No, we will still have standards.  <large epsilon> != <infinity>.
 
Q: Will you grade all of hw7 this liberally?
A: No.  This only applies to drawCirclePattern and drawSpiral, and only because we adapted them from a previous hw and the way we did apparently generated some confusion.  So this resolves that confusion in a fair way that lets you move on to the animations, which are the meat of hw7.
 
I hope that clarifies things.  Don't overthink these questions.
 
David

hw7 + quiz7 + tomorrow + midterm extended-time + final exam conflicts + Tkinter error on exit
Hi all.  A few more notes for you:
 
hw7 final version is released
Have fun!

Small change to hw7 drawCirclePattern and drawSpiral
Note that the writeup includes changing these drawings in fairly straightforward ways in response to Up and Down arrow key presses.

No quiz7 this week
There is no quiz this week.

Tomorrow's required lab is now an optional recitation
It's recitation, like Wednesdays, only optional, so attend if you think it will help.  We think it probably will for most of you!  :-)

Midterm Extended-Time Protocol
For those who qualify for extended time on the midterm:  we do not handle exams the same way we handle quizzes.  Instead, for midterms and for the final, you must contact Larry Powell's office directly and arrange for proctoring through them.

Final Exam Conflicts -> Alternate Final Exam by instructor approval
Our university-assigned final exam date and time is Thu 17-Dec, 8:30am to 11:30am.  You may qualify for an alternate final exam if either:  (1) you have another exam at that same exact time; or (2) you have a total of 3 exams in a 25-hour window.  In either case, if you wish to take the alternate final exam, you need to email both Prof Stehlik and me, listing the exact nature of the conflict.  All such approval requests must be received prior to our final exam, and you will only be allowed to take an alternate final if you have explicit permission in email from Prof Stehlik or from me prior to that time.  If you obtain that permission, then and only then you may plan on taking the alternate final on the university-assigned alternate final exam date, which is 21-December.

Ignore the weird Tkinter error on exit
Sometimes, for mysterious reasons, Tkinter will give an error when you exit an application that looks something like this:
    _tkinter.TclError: invalid command name ".4338187568"
You should simply ignore this error.  We will ignore it when grading.  Also, the internet is full of completely non-working "solutions" to make this error go away.  You can't, really.  Ah, the joys of Tkinter.  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David

My OH today: 1-3pm
Hi all.  Please note that my OH will start an hour later than usual today, running from 1pm to 3pm.
 
Thanks.
 
David

No pictures or bulk code copying in recitation or lecture
 
Hi all.  Please note:

you may not take pictures of code in recitation or lecture,

you also may not turn yourself into a human photocopier and just blindly write down reams of code that we write.  It seems we now have to formalize this, so:

you may not write down more than 20 lines of code in total across an entire recitation.  (We had to pick a number, and 20 lines is a reasonable and very 112 number to pick.)

And: please be fair to your CA?s and don?t put them in the unpleasant position of having to enforce these policies (which they will, by sending you to me, and that meeting will not go very well, so let?s just not have it).

The reason for these policies is simple: copying code does not help you learn.  In fact, it does the opposite.  Copying code decreases learning.  We know this is true, from hard experience, as we have measured this in the past.  It is highly measurable, and it hurts outcomes.  It?s that simple.

To be more precise:

When you copy code, you are not paying attention at that moment to the important ideas the CA?s are reviewing, and that hurts a lot!  It makes recitation far less useful.

When you study later on, if you don?t have the code, you have to reproduce it, which is excellent and works beautifully.  But if you do have the code, most students will simply look at it to study, rather than write it from scratch.  And that is awful.  You cannot learn to code by looking at code.  Coding simply is not a spectator sport.

Also, even later, when you go to solve seemingly related problems on the hw, history tells us that students with code in hand from recitation often try to adapt that code to solve the new problems.  That is deeply unfortunate.  It?s just not how it?s done.  The way to solve a problem is not to nudge the code for some other problem that you hope is similar into a solution.  Instead, it is to carefully, logically SOLVE the problem, and only then think about translating your solution into Python.  Anything else will lead to a logical nightmare, and will almost surely lead to more time, more stress, worse learning, and lower grades.  Awful.  But, fortunately, avoidable.

So there is the logic behind these policies.  We hope you understand.  But the policies are firm, and are there for your benefit.

Of course, that said, we always happily discuss answers with you.  You bet!  Because, without a doubt, the CA?s and us faculty are all here to help you learn this stuff.   Absitively!!!

Carpe diem!

David
 
Revised plan for this week (a bit of a breather)
 
Hi again.  From our many conversations with many of you yesterday and today, as well as from today?s recitation reports, it?s clear that we need to slow this week down just a little.  So we shall!

In particular:

NP-Completeness and the Halting Problem are moved to week9, after the midterm, so we will not cover them in lecture tomorrow and they will not appear on hw7.

This means that all of lecture tomorrow is wall-to-wall graphics and animations.  Woohoo!  We?ll review some CT, and write some fun animations from scratch.  Should be good fun, and should hopefully help put you on more solid footing heading into hw7.

That said, while we will do what we can, there is only so much we can do, because in the end event-based programming and MVC are not easy.  They are intermediate topics, and we are moving quickly through them.  So this will be challenging.  And we have some more challenging topics just ahead (object-oriented programming, NP-completeness, the halting problem, and recursion).  So the material is indeed harder now, and the pace remains brisk.

But?  We are sensitive to the fact that there is a line between fast and too fast, and we want to be sure to stay on the healthy side of that line (and in case that wasn?t clear, given that we are at CMU, I mean that we shall stay on the not-too-fast side of the line).

Bottom line:  DON?T PANIC.

Things are fine.  You can do this, and we will be sure that you are collectively ready to dive into the hw no later than after tomorrow?s lecture, if not sooner.  Some of you may be ready now, but for most, you?d be better-served studying the material in quiz7-practice tonight.  The better you understand the quiz practice material, the far better and faster and less stressful the hw will be for you.

And there's this:  you are well over halfway done with the hw's.

And this:  after this week, you get a week without any hw.

And this: when you walk out of the midterm next week, you'll have 5 days without any 112 at all.  We'd like to think 112 is good fun, and that you hopefully learn a lot.  But it is intense, and you can definitely use a break around now.  And a break is right around the corner.

Almost there...

Hope this helps.  And...  Carpe diem.

David
 
hw7 pre-release
Hi all.  For those looking for a jump on hw7, here is a pre-release.  Hw7 is due Sunday at 10pm.
 
Hw7a:  Collaborative
Unlike all previous hw's, hw7a is collaborative.  You may work in teams of 2 currently-enrolled 15-112 students.
 
Tetris (Collaborative)
Write Tetris as described here.  Note that the tutorial is for Python2, so you'll need to make some small changes, and it's also for "eventBasedAnimaton.py", which we are not using, so you'll have to make some other small changes so that it uses this semester's framework.  These changes are minimal.  I'll post the updated tutorial soon, along with the edits made.  For now, though, you can get an early start on the hw if you wish.
 
Hw7b: SOLO
This portion is SOLO like all other hw's.  You may not work with a partner on this portion.
 
drawCirclePattern (SOLO) from here.
 
drawSpiral (SOLO) from here.
 
The rest will be posted soon.
 
Have fun!!!

David

midterm1 stuff + great job + Tetris + happy birthday Mosaic
Lo and good morning!   Here are a few factoids to get your morning rolling...
 
You've finished the material for midterm1
This week's material (graphics + animations) starts the second phase of the course where we cover a few intermediate programming and CS topics.  They are all on the second midterm.  The first midterm only covers through week6 and hw6, which you have completed.  Great job!

And indeed you did a great job on hw6 (and in general)!
The quality of discussion on piazza has risen to a new level, with lots of really good, thoughtful questions.  Just the nature of your questions shows how very far you've all come along in the past 6 weeks!  Sweet!

The midterm is in 9 days (on Thu 22-Oct)
We'll post a midterm prep plan here soon, probably by tomorrow.  But why wait?  If you have some time, it's a great idea to go back to week1 and start reviewing the practice materials, quizzes, and hw's.  Also, it's a superb idea to study previous midterm1's, all posted online.  Sure, you have to adapt the material to Python3, and then with an eye towards what we covered this semester, but still, you will get a sense of what our midterms are like.  And our midterms tend to be like what they have been like.  Hmmm....  In any case, now is the time to start prepping for the midterm.

But don't forget about this week! (Tetris!)
The basic ideas behind 2d canvas graphics are not the hardest topic for many people (though we can indeed ask some very challenging graphics questions!), but animations can be challenging.  More precisely, event-based programming and the model-view-controller paradigm can be challenging.  These are intermediate topics, and you need to be focused this week and not be overly distracted by the upcoming midterm.  Besides, we get to write Tetris now, and that is fun (truly)!

Happy Birthday, commercial web browser!
21 years ago today, around 3 years before most of you were born, and exactly 3 days after I started at Microsoft, the then-unknown company called Mosaic released the first-ever commercial version of a then little-known product called a "web browser".  Here is the official PR release.

And many of you use Mosaic's browser today (well, its offspring... Firefox!)
Mosaic the company became Netscape which then morphed into Mozilla.  And that original web browser morphed a few times (including a complete rewrite, actually) into what today is Firefox.  Cool.
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

hw5 + quiz6x + quiz6 grades / no quiz7x
Hi all.  Here are some grades for your Sunday evening viewing pleasure:
 
Hw5 grades are released
Style grades improved a bit over hw4 (whew), but work remains.  Please read your hw5 style grades comments and let's all try to keep improving on style in hw6 and beyond.  Typically, by hw8 most everyone is scoring most all the style points.  Let's beat the holiday rush and aim to have this by hw7 this semester!

quiz6x grades are released
The median was a stout 70, which is very solid and in keeping with historic norms.  So you are continuing to trek nicely in preparation for the upcoming midterm, and then without having an X quiz every single week!  Kudos!!!  And here is the histogram:


quiz6 grades are released
These were predictably strong (curious how medians go up when we pre-publish the answers!  Then again, for the non-X quizzes, that of course is the design!)  Here is the histogram:


There is no X quiz this week
Woohoo!  The next time you take an "X" event, it will be the midterm.  One week from Thursday.  This week, there's just good ol' quiz7 on Friday
 
Good luck wrapping up hw6.  And...  Carpe diem.

David

hw6 autograder, final exam date and time
Hi all.  A couple of things:
 
Hw6 autograder is posted
Enjoy!  (Oh, reminder:  in general, your functions may not be destructive unless the problem statement explicitly allows it.  None of the hw6 problem statements do so....)

Final exam is Thu 17-Dec, 8:30am-11:30am
You may make your travel plans based on this.
 
Carpe diem!

David

Code and challenges from today's optional lecture
Hi all.  Well, that was fun!
 
Here is the (very toxic) code we wrote:
    ourLittleGrossLanguage.py
Here it is again with the last test case removed, so it actually works:
    ourLittleGrossLanguageWithoutGlobalsError.py
 
And...  Here are the challenges.  Again, the first team to do this wins a free lunch with me.  :-)
 
1) Make globals work inside user-defined functions
 
I added a the test case to the code that shows this bug, the one I mentioned right at the end of the lecture:
 
# This case will fail because we only added most-but-not-all of
# the functionality needed to use local scopes. In particular,
# you can't access a global inside a local scope now, because
# we only check the local scope and we don't check the parent scopes. :-(
["""
(block
 (= x 42)
 (df f (n) x)
 (f x)
)
 """, 42 ],
]
 
That function fails with the error that x is not defined, even though it is global.
 
2) Make loops work
Invent a good syntax for a loop and make iterative factorial work properly.
 
Good luck!

David

Reminder: Parents Weekend Talks (10am and 1pm) and Optional Lecture (11am)
Hi all.  Just a friendly reminder of soon-to-start events:
 
Parent's weekend optional talks (for parents), Sat 10am and Sat 1pm, SH 125
Based on student interest (well, students guessing about their parents' interest), we'll have some optional 30-minute talks (with some time afterwards for questions) about what 112 is, what CS is, and really to discuss whatever parents may wish to discuss.  I will host one Saturday at 10am and Mark will hold another one Saturday at 1pm.  You can attend either, neither, or both, regardless of which lecture you normally attend.  Both are in SH 125.  That's Scaife Hall, which is on Frew Street below Baker/Porter.

Optional lecture (for you), Sat 11am-1pm, PH A18C
We'll resume our optional lectures this week on Saturday from 11am- 1pm in PH (Porter Hall) A18C.  We'll write our own programming language.  Woohoo!  While parents in theory could attend, this will be a normal optional/advanced lecture, which is to say it will go very fast through very technical material.  That is, it is designed for you!
 
Carpe diem!

David

Efficiency notes / NP-Complete+Halting --> next week / cost of Python builtins
Hi all.  Some key announcements here:
 
Efficiency notes are posted (and worth a peek)
It's what we covered in class yesterday, except it also includes some links to some updated sorting notes with nice sorting visualizations and also the costs of some Python builtins.  Enjoy!  :-) 

NP-Completeness and Halting Problem --> next week
All things considered, it's best for us to push these topics to next week. (and still really good that we covered them this week, too, since they are complicated and worthy of multiple treatments)  This will give us time to review them again in class and in recitation next week before you need to know them on a quiz or on hw.  All good things.  Also, some CA's did not cover this material when they took 112 and have not had 251, so they need to have their own lesson on it, too!  :-)  We'll have all that done before Tuesday's lecture.

Efficiency is still this week
To be clear, we are only pushing NP-Completeness and the Halting Problem.  Efficiency is still this week!

Cost of some Python builtins
This is from the efficiency notes (here), and you'll need it for hw6:  
Here we use S for a set and L for a list:
Some are O(1), including len(L), (val in S)
Some are O(N), including max(L), min(L), (val in L), L.count(val)
Sorting is O(NlogN)
For a more complete list, see here
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw6: weirdnesses adapting old quizzes
Hi all.  Many of you have asked good questions about how to adapt the old quizzes.  Turns out there are lots of little gotchas going from Python2 to Python3, plus there are some early-week restrictions (like no conditionals which never was an issue this semester),  that you can ignore now.
 
So: just do reasonable things and you'll be fine.  We'll grade these quizzes somewhat loosely, and be sure not to dock any points due to Python2-to-3-isms or other s15-to-f15-isms.
 
As should hopefully be apparent, we are using these quizzes to help you get started studying for the upcoming midterm.  So just try to get the most studying value out of these quizzes as possible, without worrying too much about the whole Python2-to-3 weirdnesses.
 
That said, here are a few issues:
 
roundToInt: you may use conditionals.
everywhere: you may use lists, sets, etc.
in general: convert / to //, except if obviously we wanted float division
round: this works differently in Python2 and Python3.  Ugh.  Use either one you prefer.
findZeroWithBisection:  that comes from here.  Hint: the answer to this question is that both endpoints share the same sign, which violates the assumptions of findZeroWithBisection.  (That's one strong hint)!
 
Again, regarding previous quizzes, we understand that this semester in particular there is a large impedance with previous semesters, and we will grade accordingly.  So don't worry about it, just do the best you can, and get the most studying value as you can out of them.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Parent's weekend + optional lecture + quiz6 + hw6 + more
Hi all.  A bunch of notices on this lovely sunny Thursday afternoon:
 
Parent's weekend optional talks (for parents), Sat 10am and Sat 1pm, SH 125
Based on student interest (well, students guessing about their parents' interest), we'll have some optional 30-minute talks (with some time afterwards for questions) about what 112 is, what CS is, and really to discuss whatever parents may wish to discuss.  I will host one Saturday at 10am and Mark will hold another one Saturday at 1pm.  You can attend either, neither, or both, regardless of which lecture you normally attend.  Both are in SH 125.  That's Scaife Hall, which is on Frew Street below Baker/Porter.

Optional lecture (for you), Sat 11am-1pm, PH A18C
We'll resume our optional lectures this week on Saturday from 11am- 1pm in PH (Porter Hall) A18C.  We'll write our own programming language.  Woohoo!  While parents in theory could attend, this will be a normal optional/advanced lecture, which is to say it will go very fast through very technical material.  That is, it is designed for you!

NP-Complete and Halting Problem plan
Once we wrapped up big-Oh, stuff, we moved very fast today through hard material.  You don't need to master it by tomorrow's quiz, nor for hw6, but yes after that.  We'll post notes, I'll add videos to the notes, and we'll review this again next week (in one or both of lecture and recitation, not to mention small-group sessions and Wed/Thu night sessions).  So today was just the start...

getPairSums is not on the quiz tomorrow
We never got to cover it in recitation or lecture, so it will not be on the quiz tomorrow.  Please plan accordingly.

hw6 is lighter...
By design, hw6 is lighter than some recent hw's, some of you are reporting quite a bit so (though some of you may find it takes a lot of time, so still frontload the hw and avoid deadline crunches).  This is intentional.  After a few weeks of pushing, you need a breather.  With this time, we suggest that you:
Spend time with your parents if they are visiting this weekend.
Sleep a lot.  And socialize and exercise.  And maybe watch some clouds float around.
Start studying for the midterm.  It's coming soon.
Start thinking about your term project.  It's coming soon (really, it is).
Catch up on other courses.
Nothing.  Truly, this is not a bad option.  :-)
Hw6:  s15 quizzes are mislabeled as s14 (but hw6 links are correct)!
Somehow, for all of last semester, the quizzes had the wrong year on them!  But rest assured, the links in hw6 are correct and they do point to s15's quizzes.  Sorry for the confusion.

Hw6: s15-quiz1, skip "K" and "L"
The hw originally said to just skip "L", but "K" should also be skipped. (If you've already done them, no worries, we won't penalize you for including them!)

Hw6: invertDictionary values are immutable
We added this clarification to invertDictionary: "Also, you may assume that the values in the original dictionary are all immutable, so that they are legal keys in the resulting inverted dictionary."

Hw6 now has actual point values!
The problems all were listed at xx pts each.  Whoops.  Now that's 20 pts each, as some of you correctly guessed.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw3 style, quiz4, hw4 bonus2, be not destructive nor overly evaluate, here comes the sun!
Hi all.  Here are a few notes for as this balmy Saturday starts to wind itself down:
 
hw3 style grades and comments posted
As expected, nearly everyone missed all -5 pts on hw3 style (though two of you scored a perfect -0 on style, fabulous!).  This is not a major concern so long as you take the time to click on your hw3 style grade (before submitting hw4!), read the reasons you lost style points, and try to improve your style on hw4.  Remember: on hw4, style is worth up to 10 pts.  As a reference, usually by hw6 or so most folks are losing very few of the style points.  For now, it's a learning experience...  Keep at it...

quiz4 grades are posted
In the past 3 days, the CA's graded 430+ quiz4x's, and then hw3 style, and finally hw4's.  About 1300 total graded items!  And alas, your quiz4's are graded and available in autolab.  The results were very strong!  Kudos!  Here is the histogram:


hw4 bonus2 will be posted tomorrow
Sorry for the delay.  You'll still have Sunday + Monday to work on it, for those who are so inclined.

Do not destructively modify lists!
Unless the problem statement explicitly says you can, in general you may not destructively modify lists (or other mutable data structures, when we learn about them) that are provided to your functions.  For example, do not destructively modify the Scrabble dictionary!

Do not use eval!
Again, in general you may not use eval, including anywhere on hw4. 

It was 46 years ago today...
Just over two months after people first stepped on the moon, the Beatles last album, Abbey Road, was released on Sep 26, 1969.

 
Carpe diem.

David

Section change redux / linearRegression early-bird bonus / brython bugs update
HI all.  A few more notes du jour:
 
Section changes are permanent
Some of you took @994 to mean a section-change-for-a-day.  No, it's not that!  @994 is the policy for a permanent section change.

linearRegression early-bird special (if you finished it yesterday)
We understand some of you (not many, but a few) may have invested considerable time and energy into the linearRegression problem prior to us changing it to bonus.  If you are in that group, and you had already finished linearRegression prior to our posting the update yesterday, then you should email me your linearRegression code by 5:30pm today to receive an additional +5 early-bird bonus (this is beyond the +2.5-pt bonus on the problem).  This is not for those who wrote the code today or any time after we made it bonus, but only to be maximally fair to those who had already written it prior to our posted change.

Brython is fixed!
This now works in Brython (be sure to clear your browser cache to get the latest Brython to see the fix):
for i in range(2): pass
print(i)  # should be 1, and it is! Huzzah!

Brython is broken
But all these don't work in Brython:
print([4,0,4].index(4,1)) # should be 2, but it is 0 in brython

print( (1,2) == [1,2] ) # should be False, but is True in brython

print( type((1,)*2) ) # should print tuple, in brython prints list

n = 1
for n in range(n): pass
print(n)  # should print 0, in brython prints -1

# lower prio
a = [1, 2, 3]
a[0:3:2] = [ 4, 5 ]
print(a)  # should print [4, 2, 5], in brython prints [4, 5]

t = (1, 2)
t[0] = 42  # should crash: TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item assignment
print(t)   # in brython, this prints (42, 2) Thanks to those of you who helped find them!  We have filed bug reports with the Brython team, and they are usually very prompt in fixing these, so I expect by early next week these will be resolved.  Let's hope!

Carpe diem.
 
David

New Section Change Policy
Hi all.  While we strongly discourage "section shopping" (to the point that we will shut down section changes if we see it), we understand that there are a variety of schedule conflicts some 112 students have that may be helped by a section transfer.  And so we are beginning to see some openings in some sections, and so now we will institute this updated section change policy, effective immediately:
 
Autolab is the official source of section assignments
Autolab is the definitive source of what section you are assigned to.  If there is an error there, you and/or your CA's should let me know immediately and we will update it.

You must attend your assigned section
On both W and F, you must attend whichever time corresponds to the section listed in Autolab.  And...

You must attend the same times on W and F
You may not mix-and-match across W and F.  If you are at 2:30pm on W, then you must be at 2:30pm on F.  But...

You may change sections up to one time henceforth
Starting today, ignore any previous changes, everyone can elect to make up to 1 section change this semester.  You may not make 2 change, though, so be thoughtful about if or when you would make such a change.

To change sections the one time you are allowed, follow these steps in this order:
Physically attend the new section time on W (not F)

Wait, standing, in the back, for 5 minutes after the section starts for everyone to be seated.  If more than one person is doing this, form a queue.

If there is not an empty seat, then you may not transfer into that section as it is full.  So then you may quietly leave.

If there is an empty seat after those 5 minutes (and only after the 5 minutes), then you may take it, and join the recitation.

Just taking the seat does not mean you joined the recitation!  For that, immediately after the recitation is over, you must:

Tell the CA's who are present that you are joining their recitation, and

Email the same message to Mark (mjs@cs.cmu.edu), to me (koz@cmu.edu), to your previous section's CA's, (see the syllabus for a list with andrew id's) and to your new section's CA's (ditto).

Once I receive that email, if everything is in order, I will confirm the change and update Autolab.

You are not in the new section until you receive the confirmation and see the update in Autolab.  If that does not happen, email me again for details.

Again, no section shopping, but please use this judiciously for those who really have a compelling reason to change sections.  We hope this helps!

Carpe diem.
 
David

quiz4x grades
Hi all.  Thanks to the fabulous dedication of our CA's (truly!), your quiz4x's are now graded.  And the results were....
 
Decidedly good!!!!
 
The raw median was a solidly respectable 66.  This is just a hair below historic norms, and well above the quiz3 results from some semesters.  But if we bear in mind that this was the first time you had a shorter timed quiz, and one that included Reasoning Over Code and also problems you hadn't prepped for, this is solid, indeed!  Remember: all previous semesters had taken several hard timed quizzes by now, and seen lots of Reasoning Over Code, and lots more Code Tracing, and more homework problems, and generally invested about 1.3x as much as time as you have to this point.  And yet you are competitive with them.  That's great!
 
That said, naturally, a 66 is not exactly a reason for a victory party.  Work remains.  There is room for improvement, and improve we shall.  But it seems to vindicate that this somewhat-reduced time-on-task approach we are taking this semester is actually working quite well.  So far, at least.
 
That's all on you and the CA's.  You are working hard, studying hard, and we have the proof that you are learning a lot.  Kudos!
 
So you know:  your graded quiz that you get back will include your raw score.  To adjust the median to the historic norm of 70 (which requires similar adjustments in most semesters), everyone's adjusted score is their raw score times (70/66).  Your adjusted score and not your raw score is already entered in autolab.
 
Here is a distribution of raw scores:

 
Solid job, everyone.  And good night!!!
 
David
 
Important quiz4 + hw4 announcements
Hi all.  Some important announcements regarding quiz4, hw4, and more:
 
quiz4 contents
All the material from quiz4-practice can appear on quiz4 tomorrow.  Nothing else will be there.

quiz4 extended-time policy
For tomorrow, anyone who qualifies for extended time can show up at Mark Stehlik's office on the half-hour (8:30, 9:30, 10:30, ..., up to 3:30) to take the quiz. He should be there, but if he steps out, he'll likely leave a message and be right back.

hw4: new problem posted (runSimpleProgram)
The last problem (runSimpleProgram) has been added to hw4.  It's pretty cool, we think.  We hope you agree!

hw4 linearRegression -> Bonus
To keep the required part of hw4 manageable, we have moved linearRegression to bonus.  It is very unusual to make such a change after a pre-release, but still this is in everyone's best interests.  If you already started it, then you are on your way to some bonus, at least.  Anyhow, please note this change.

hw4 due Monday but no late/grace day
Given the late release of the last problem, we are giving everyone a 1-day extension on hw4.  But it is important for hw4 not to spill over into week5, so there is no late or grace day now for hw4, so it is due Monday at 10pm for everyone.  And even so, we encourage you to wrap up hw4 by Sunday night if possible.

hw4 hint: bestScrabbleHand: no permutations
Do not generate permutations of hands in bestScrabbleHand.  There is another, more-brute-force and definitely simpler-to-write way to do this.

Sorting and other Worked Examples -> next week
You do not have to know sorting nor the other Worked Examples from today's lecture for quiz4, nor for hw4.  But you do need to know them for next week, including Tuesday's lecture, and especially for any quizzes next week.  By then, you are expected to be able to write any of the Worked Examples, including the various sorts, facilely from scratch.

Lost navy blue jacket
Someone left a navy blue jacket in lecture1 today.  You may claim it at my office between 1pm and 5pm tomorrow.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Today's lecture is mostly a lecture, not just a quiz!
Hi again.  Sorry for the spam...
 
You should know that the quiz will take 25-30 minutes, that's all.  That will be followed by an hour of normal Thursday lecture.  Please plan accordingly.

David

Reminder: quizzes start right at the start of lecture
Hi again.  Please be on time today.  If you are late, you still have to finish the quiz when everyone else does.
 
Good luck on the quiz!

David

Updated Extended-Time Protocol for today's quiz
Hi all.  Sorry my last post on this was inaccurate.  You can indeed take an extra-time quiz in lecture (well, nearby lecture), or you can come to my OH from noon to 1:30pm, or you can go to Mark's office right after the 1:30pm lecture (so at 3pm).  Any of those are fine.
 
Thanks.
 
David


Quiz 4x extended-time protocol
Hi all.  If you qualify for extended-time, please stop by my office between 1:30pm and 3pm tomorrow to take your quiz.  If you cannot make that time, then you may take it during the normal quiz time, but alert the proctors before you start, and then you will sit outside the lecture hall, somewhere nearby.
 
David

Quiz 4x tomorrow
Hi all.  Quiz4x (and extra quiz, which counts as any other) is tomorrow in lecture.  It will commence immediately at the start of each lecture, so be sure to be on time!  It covers the material from weeks 1-3, including hw3.  It does not include material from week4.  It does not include optional/advanced material.
 
You can and should study quizzes from previous semesters.  In particular, tomorrow's quiz will be harder than our Friday quizzes (as we discussed, since they have very different purposes), and will include question types we haven't yet seen this semester (short answer, reasoning over code, etc).  Study previous semesters' quizzes to get an idea.
 
Important note:  while the material is similar each semester, it is also a little different every time.  You are only responsible for what we cover this semester.  So don't panic when you see something like bitwise operators (eg: 2^5&3) or boolean arithmetic (eg: (True * 47)) or other oddities (eg: (True and 17)).
 
So: use previous semesters' quizzes to study from, when applicable, and do not worry about them when not applicable.
 
And don't stress about this.  It's just one quiz, worth a fraction of 1% of your grade.  Do study, but don't stress.  You'll be fine.  
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

15-110 / quiz4-practice / quiz4x / alternate recitation / hw4 / optional lecture / etc
Hi all.  I hope the post-hw3 lull was enjoyable!  Now we gear up in earnest for week4 and hw4!   And to that end...
 
Last day to switch to 15-110
For those who wish to switch to 15-110, this is it.  Please contact Prof Kaynar (dilsun@cs.cmu.edu) if you wish to switch.  Today!

quiz4-practice is posted
You'll review the solutions in recitation today.  Note that these are the problems for Friday's quiz4.  Tomorrow's quiz4x in lecture will cover material through week3 and strings, but not including week4 and lists.

alternate recitation tomorrow, 4:30pm, Porter Hall A19D
For those of you who are missing today's recitation for university-approved absences (religious holiday, athletic event, etc), we are hosting an alternate recitation tomorrow at 4:30pm in Porter Hall A19D.

hw4 pre-release
Hw4 is now pre-released, with most of the final version out there.  One or two more problems will be added later today.  Enjoy!

Optional/advanced lecture attendance
Surprisingly few of you attended the most recent optional/advanced lecture.  I sure hope more attend starting this week.  These talks help you get much more out of this course, covering amazing topics that many of you, as non-CS-majors, may never see or hear about again in your lives.  Don't miss out!

Optional/advanced lecture #4: Saturday, noon to 2pm, Hamburg Hall 1502
We'll surely have some fun covering some fun topic in a fun way.  What fun! :-)

Cloudcoder for week4
Kelly says:  "Cloudcoder now has string and list practice problems for week 4. Additionally, we have made some updates to the system; you may notice that you now have access to new features, or that you've lost old ones. Feel free to check it out!"

Brython bugs
Again, as we discussed in lecture, Brython has a few bugs regarding lists and tuples.  We'll file them with the Brython team and update our Brython version as soon as they have fixes, which should be in a couple of days.  Meanwhile, you can always use Standard Python to avoid these bugs.
 
Carpe diem!

David

hw3, my OH, quiz4
Hi all.  A few items to get this lovely day rolling:
 
hw3 redux
So now we are at 112 speed.  Woohoo.  :-)  And great job, collectively, on hw3!  That was not an easy hw.

hw3 solution sessions
Many of you got something working on hw3, but maybe with very long and less-than-ideally-clear solutions.  To wit, our entire sample solutions to the non-bonus problems were 124 lines of code.  It's ok that yours were longer, but it suggests that you would really benefit from attending this week's optional hw solutions sessions and seeing a clear way to solve each problem.

my OH this week
Please note that my OH this week will run as follows:
    Tue:  noon to 1:30pm
    Wed: 1:30pm to 3:00pm
    Thu: noon to 1:30pm
See some of you soon!

quiz4
We will have two quizzes this week -- quiz4a and quiz4b.  Each will count as a full quiz on its own.  Quiz4a will be in class on Thursday, and will be a traditional quiz covering material from weeks1-3 and hw1-3.  It will not cover anything from this week.  You should study old quizzes from previous semesters to get an idea of what that will be like.  Quiz4b will be a standard Friday quiz, except it will only cover new material from this week, and nothing from earlier weeks (after all, quiz4a will do that). 
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Do not help each other debug hw!
Hi all.  Students may not look at each other's hw code.  So that absolutely precludes any chance of helping each other debug.  You simply may not do it.
 
Learning to debug is an absolute requirement for any student in this course, and anyone at all serious about using programming in any way.
 
When you write code, you will create bugs.  There's no way around that.  And so you must develop the skills to find and fix your own bugs.  On your own.
 
Of course, we are always here to help.  We won't tell you where you bugs are, but we will absolutely help give you the skills you need to find them yourself.
 
So if you are stuck, and you have a bug, and you can't fix it even after some admirable effort, then:  post to piazza or go to OH and get some help.  We are here to help.
 
But do not ask for debugging help from other students on your hw, and do not give debugging help to them on their hw.  That's just not allowed.
 
Let's all play by the rules.  They are there for a reason:  to help you learn as much of this as possible, as well as possible.  And you will!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Extended submissions and extended OH for tomorrow
Hi all.  To further help you wrap up hw3, we have extended the submissions from 8 to 16 (normally they'd go to 12, or 1.5x the original, but this week we'll give you a full 2x).
 
Also, OH tomorrow will be extended to run from 6pm to 10pm, and we're adding a few more CA's to staff them.
 
Even so, they will be busy, but hopefully the extra OH and extra CA's and extra submissions will all help at least a bit.

Good luck with it.

David

How to use your grace day
Hi all.  Just about half of you have a 90-or-higher now on hw3.   And so it seems maybe around half of you may be taking a grace day on hw3.
 
That's ok.  This is not an easy hw.
 
To use your grace day, you do nothing special, just submit as normal by tomorrow night's 10pm late deadline, and autolab will automatically use one of your 3 grace days, so there will not be a late penalty deducted.  Sweet.
 
And while you should give hw3 the ol' college effort, that does not mean to work beyond your abilities (which makes no sense, right?).
 
Do not stay up all night tonight.  Or even super late.  And do not stress.  Just give it the time you've got.  Get some sleep, and tomorrow give it what additional time you've got, even while attending to your other courses and commitments.  And then submit it, and move on.
 
So while you should try hard on this, you have to do so within your capacity, and then move on, since week4 starts and then week5.  If week3 was not your best week, no worries, some week had to be not-your-best week.
 
Meanwhile, good luck with hw3, and do get your sleep.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

New and improved "." hint / don't use eval / reprise #3
Hi all.  I hope you are off to a great start today!  Here's a few announcements, starting with a fix to a late-night hint:
 
topLevelFunctionNames "." hint redux
So one of the hints last night was half-baked, a clear by-product of my being up way past my bedtime (I get up at 5am most days, so I am very rarely up at 1am most nights).  It's like I tell you:  you are not at your best when you are exhausted.  Neither am I...

Anyhow, for topLevelFunctionNames, if you only search with a trailing dot, then after you find a function named, say, "fn", your search string would be "fn.", and then if you search for a function named, say, "n", you'd search for "n." in "fn." and you'd find it.  Ugh.

One solution:  search for ".n.", with leading and trailing dots.  Of course, you have to have a leading dot on the whole list of names, too (which you'd get rid of just before returning).  So after "fn" the list of names would be ".fn.", and then for "n" you'd search for ".n." in ".fn." and you happily would not find it.  Whew.

Of course, by now you might just punt on this whole thing and write a helper function that uses names.split(".") or some such approach.  Your choice.  Sorry for the confusion, and thanks to the eagle-eyed student who caught it!  :-)

Don't use eval!
As noted in lecture, you may not use eval() in your solutions!  It is not only a really bad idea in general, it also is not allowed by the autograder.  Then again, there is no need, at least not on hw3.  If you have a string that happens to be all digits, for example, (like "2345") and you want to convert it into the corresponding integer (2345), instead of eval(s) just use int(s).  In any case, don't use eval!

Optional Lecture #3 reprise: Mon 6-8pm, Baker Hall 235B
The reprise to today's optional lecture will be on Monday (tomorrow) from 6:00 to 8:00 pm in Baker Hall 235B.

Carpe diem!

David

Two more hints (and good night!)
Hi all.  I left this one out (whoops):  In topLevelFunctionNames, each time we added a fn name to our result, we also added a trailing dot (".").  This made it easer to search if a fn name was already added, since we could search for (fnName + ".") (see?).  Of course, it also left an extra dot at the end, but that's easily handled (right?).
 
And this:  how to go from a repr back to the human-readable string?  Say, for example, you know the repr of a string looks like this:
     'ab	c
d	ef'
What does that look like if we replace the 	's with tabs and the 
's with newlines?  Easy enough, just paste that inside a print() function, like so:
     print('ab	c
d	ef')
This will print out the string as you wish.  This is especially helpful since the autograder sometimes will show you strings only in their repr format.  So print them!  Also, be sure to place quotes around the string before printing it, if those quotes are not already provided.
 
Hope this helps!
 
And good night!  (I get up at 5am, so by this time of the night, I can barely see straight....)
 
David
 
Some important hw3 notes (extended OH @ noon tomororw, a few hints, don't panic!)
Hi all.  Here are a few important hw3 items for your late-night viewing pleasure:
 
Hw3 is indeed tougher and longer
Don't be surprised by this.  Believe it or not, hw3 is still reduced in size (mostly) and difficulty (a little) from some recent semesters.  But it is not easy, and definitely harder than hw1 or hw2.  Don't get discouraged.   As I noted earlier, we are basically at full speed.  This is basically as hard as it gets.  At least, if it does get harder, you'll also get stronger, so this is effectively as hard as it gets!

Expect longer queues tomorrow
As will be increasingly the case, you should expect longer OH queues and slower piazza response times as we approach hw deadlines.  The tiny queues and 1-minute piazza response times of week1 are behind us now.  So:  please plan accordingly.  It is best to get to OH as early as you can.  Wednesday and Thursday OH will remain blissfully quiet.

Extended OH tomorrow (starts at noon, which is a fine time to be there)
We have added 2 more hours to OH tomorrow, so it will run from noon to 10pm.  The earlier you get there, the better. 

Increased OH staffing tomorrow
To further drive down queues, we have increased staffing for tomorrow's OH.  Woohoo.

Even so: expect long queues
Despite our 40 CA"s investing 500+ hours per week into this course (for real!), we still have outer limits to how much OH we can provide.  And tomorrow, for the first time, we will probably exceed those limits.  And so please understand that the longer queue times are unavoidable.  We'll do our best, and you'll do your best, and that will have to be good enough!  Fortunately, it will be, too!

Some hints
Here are a few hw3 hints (well, hint-like comments, not huge hints) that may help you.  Or not.  None will give away problems, but they may help.

In patternedMessage, use print(repr(s)) to see the newlines and tabs in the string s.

Also in patternedMessage, be sure to read the part that says "any leading or trailing newlines in the pattern are removed".

In topLevelFunctionNames, note that duplicate functions only count the first time (as noted in the provided example).

Also in topLevelFunctionNames, it may be helpful to write a helper function that takes a string (perhaps a line of code) and an index, and returns the quote character, if any, that starts at that index.  So it might return ', ", ''', or """, or None if it's none of those.
 
Don't Panic
Just do your best, and things will be fine.  This is just one hw, among 10.  While, yes, it would be nice to do well, even very well, and to truly master the material, it would not be a crushing blow if you did finish.  Just learn what you can, and solve what you can, in the time you can reasonably give it.  And don't stress. And don't panic.  Then, after the deadline, go to the hw3 solution sessions, and study for the quiz, and learn how to do these problems well.  For now, as always, just do your best.  That's all you've got, and it will be enough.

To restate:  on the first day, we talked about how we learn by immersion in this course, and sometimes that means your head may spin a bit, that it may be a bit overwhelming and hard to follow at times, given the pace we go.  If this is one of those times, don't panic.  It's just what we said would happen.  Just keep your focus, and do what you can.  Maybe not this week (though maybe so!), but soon enough in any case, you will learn this material really well, and you will do a fine term project.  You will be fine.
 
Carpe noctem.
 
David

hw3 / quiz3 / optional lecture #3 / etc
Hi all.  I hope you are making serious strides on hw3!  Some salient notes:
 
hw3 autograder is posted, but...
It is out there now.  But.... Be careful, and use your submissions wisely.  You only have 8 submissions, and each problem in hw3 has some quirky edge cases.  So be careful, test thoroughly, and get the very most out of each of your 8 submissions.

"What if I use up my 8 submissions?"
Then you can submit one day late, with the usual grace day or late deduction, and get 4 more submissions.

"What if I use up those 4 extra submissions, too?"
Well, chalk that up to a lesson learned.  Don't do that.

hw3 hint: repr(s)
Sometimes it can be hard to see the whitespace in a string when you print it.  You might prefer to see the 
's and 	's for newlines and tabs instead of actual newlines and tabs.  You can do that with print(repr(s)) instead of print(s).  Handy hint!!!

Quiz3 grades
As usual, the CA's graded quiz3 yesterday!  And the results were a very-solid median of 88. Nice job, everyone!  Here is the histogram:


Optional/Advanced Lecture #3: Tomorrow (Sunday), 11am, Hamburg Hall 1502
More fun times!  And, as always, a CA-led reprise will soon follow for those who can't make it tomorrow.

Waitlists are cleared!
Woohoo!!!  If you think you are on a waitlist, or in general if SIO does not show you as normally enrolled in this course, then you need to see me asap.

"hw3 is hard"
Yes, it is.  We are approaching full speed now.  You are doing great.  Keep at it.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Our first 2 cheating cases...
Hi all.  It is with chagrin that I alert you to the fact that we are now processing our first 2 cheating cases.  As you do hw3, please please bear in mind our SOLO hw policy, that we definitely do enforce it, and that we definitely do have a very powerful automated tool to assist in that process.  So: don't cheat.

Here is the not-so-complicated and extremely-effective process by which cheating is detected:  I push a button, and a moment later, the tool says: "Here you go, these 2 probably cheated."  That's it.  And while I most definitely do not take the tool's opinion as fact, and I look very carefully with my own eyes, and then Mark looks very carefully with his, there is this truth:  the tool is nearly always right.  When people cheat in this course, they nearly always get caught and they then face serious consequences, as clearly spelled out in the syllabus.  These include grade drops, letters to dean, and perhaps failing the course.  This is in addition to possible further consequences from the Dean of Student Affairs, which may include academic probation, a year or more suspension, or outright expulsion from the university.

This is serious.  We take it seriously.  We said so on day one, and we meant it.
 
None of this is meant whatsoever to scare you.  No!!!!  Not at all.  If you are following the rules -- as over 99% of you are doing! -- then you have nothing at all to be concerned about.  Truly.  This is not a witch hunt, this course is not a police state, and we definitely do not pursue possible cheating cases without an abundance of strongly-suggestive evidence.
 
Instead, this post is meant to empower you.  Knowledge is power, after all.  Knowing that cheating is caught here, don't cheat.  If you are late in the hw cycle, and you can't get it done completely, then simply accept that fact, and submit what you can, whatever it is.  Submit your own work, not someone else's.
 
And, of course, you are never alone.  We are here to help.  With tons of office hours, and zippy-quick piazza help, and small-group tutoring sessions, and large-group review and solution sessions, etc.  And there's also Academic Development tutoring.  And so on.  You have vast resources here.  Use them!  You are not alone, and you never have to turn to cheatiing.
 
I very much hope these are not only our first 2 cheating cases of the semester, but also our last 2 cheating cases of the semester.
 
Let's all please make that happen.

Carpe diem.
 
David

quiz3 extended-time protocol
Hi again.  This week's protocol is a bit different for those who pre-quality for extended time.  Please go to any section from 9:30am to 3:30pm (not 4:30pm), and ask the CA on duty for an extended-time quiz.  Then, right away, send an email to that CA, your own CA's, and me, indicating your quiz start time.  Then, go to the Engineering Library in Wean Hall (near the 4th floor elevators) to take the quiz.  We will send a proctor there from time to time.  Naturally, do not talk to anyone or use a computer or use any notes or books or other disallowed resources at all from the time you send the "started" email until the time you submit your quiz.  To submit your quiz, return it to whichever CA is on duty at the time you complete it.

Good luck!

David

And please remember not to post comments on our course-wide announcements
Please do not spam everyone.  If you have questions, make them in separate, private piazza posts.
 
Comments added to our posts go course-wide.  Besides, we generally delete them rather than respond to them.
 
Of course, we very happily welcome your questions.  But please make them in private posts, just to the course instructors.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Remember to show your work on code tracing quiz/exam problems! (and we ignore scratch paper!)
Hi all.  As the subject line says, please show your work on CT problems.  We do not give credit for CT problems that do not include some shown work on the quiz itself.
 
And also remember that while we peek at scratch paper to be sure everything looks ok, that's all we do, and then we dispose of it before we start grading the quizzes.  Thus, we never look at scratch paper when grading your quiz.  So you need to show your work directly on your quiz itself.
 
What do we mean by "show your work"?  We aren't specific.  You surely don't have to show too much work, nor in any specific manner.  It just has to be enough so we can see something about your thought process in deriving the answer.
 
Anyhow, no shown work == no points on CT, so please do show your work!  Thanks!
 
Good luck on today's quiz.
 
David

Still need 10 volunteers from lecture 1
Hi all.  We have 5 volunteers so far, which is great (and thanks!!!).  But we need 10 more in order to get everyone who has been participating since Day One actually enrolled in the course.
 
So, again:
 
Form for students willing to "move" to Lecture 2 (due Thu 17-Sep at 3pm)
Please fill out this optional form if you are in lecture 1 and willing to "move" to lecture 2 (and your schedule has no conflicts on Tue/Thu 1:30-2:50pm).  While you must have actual room for the move, this will only be on paper for the registrar, as you can still attend lecture 1 and the same recitation as you do now.  But doing this will create roster room for waitlisted students to be enrolled before the end-of-week deadline when they may otherwise have to drop (even though we have room for them!).  So:  THANK YOU!!!
 
David

3 important polls (waitlists, section exchange, etc) (all due Thu 17-Sep by 3pm) (please read)
Hi all.  Please read this entire post carefully.  Here are 3 important polls that many, though not all, of you may wish to fill out.
Form for still-waitlisted-students
Form for students willing to "move" to Lecture 2 [seeking volunteers]
Optional Section Exchange Form
 
Details:
 
Form for still-waitlisted-students (due Thu 17-Sep by 3pm)
This is mandatory for all waitlisted students:  please fill out this form asap if you are still waitlisted in 15-112.  Thanks.

Form for students willing to "move" to Lecture 2 (due Thu 17-Sep at 3pm)
Please fill out this optional form if you are in lecture 1 and willing to "move" to lecture 2 (and your schedule has no conflicts on Tue/Thu 1:30-2:50pm).  While you must have actual room for the move, this will only be on paper for the registrar, as you can still attend lecture 1 and the same recitation as you do now.  But doing this will create roster room for waitlisted students to be enrolled before the end-of-week deadline when they may otherwise have to drop (even though we have room for them!).  So:  THANK YOU!!!

Optional Section Exchange Form (due Thu 17-Sep at 3pm)
Please fill out this optional form if you would like to change sections and/or lectures.  We will have a lottery tomorrow night and try to satisfy as many requests as possible, though we probably will not be able to satisfy 100% of your requests.

Please fill these out asap (now is an ideal time!).  We can also briefly discuss in both lectures tomorrow.

Thanks!

And....  Carpe diem!!!
 
David
 
hw3 / lost gold watch / eschew public posts / optional advanced #3 / etc
Hi again.  Some more announcements:
 
hw3 is complete
We decided not to include reasoning-over-code after all, so the required part of hw3 was completely posted earlier.  Here, we just added one more bonus question.  It's really fun, I think/hope.  You decide!

lost gold watch?
Someone lost a gold watch at Tuesday's lecture2.  If it was you, please contact Catherine Copetas (copetas@cs.cmu.edu) and/or check out the lost+found.

Please stop the public posts
In my heart, I firmly believe that we all one day can learn to use piazza properly...

Optional/Advanced Lecture #3: Sunday, 11am-1pm, Hamburg Hall 1502
Should be good fun!  And as always, there will be a reprise for those who can't make it.

print("".join([chr(v+97) for v in [19, 7, 0, 13, 10, 18]]))
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw3
Hi all.  Some notes about hw3:
 
hw3 is 95% posted.
We'll add a couple short reasoning-over-code and also a fun bonus later today or perhaps tomorrow, but it's 95% out there (and much of it was pre-released yesterday).

we are grading for style this week!
Knowledge is power!  Start using good style!  We'll discuss what that means in lecture tomorrow.

small changes from pre-released version
We generally use the pre-released version identically, but there are a few small (tiny) changes we had to make that you should be aware of:

bestStudentAverage:
round to nearest integer
return "wilma:92" not ("wilma", 92)

ciphers:
no "route" in function names (eg, it's decodeRightLeftCipher)
 
Carpe diem!

David

Reprise #2 / Late Adds Extension Form / CloudCoder #3 / hw3-practice + hw3 pre-release
Hi all.  I hope your Ides of September are off to a splendiforous start!  And a few notes here for your cogitation:
 
Optional Lecture #2 reprise is today, 6pm, WEH 4623
Nick will lead today's optional lecture reprise.  We had good fun on Sunday.  It's a fine topic, and I think you'll enjoy it if you attend.  Have fun!

Late Course Addition Extension Request Form (due today!)
If you missed required quizzes or hw's due to being added late to the course, then fill out this form today (Tue 15-Sep 2015). Look to your email tomorrow for further instructions, but basically you have until this Sunday night to get all caught up with what you missed.

Week3 now in CloudCoder
Kelly says: "A third set of practice problems have been released on Cloudcoder. Some of these problems cover top-down design, and some help you practice debugging. Tip: If you want to see just the problems for this week, you can click on the arrow next to '15-112' on the sidebar to select whichever problem set you want."

hw3-practice pre-release
For those seeking a head start today, here are some problems that will appear tomorrow in hw3-practice:
-sameChars() from here
-wordWrap() from here
-largestNumber(text) from here
-longestSubpalindrome(s) from here
-longestCommonSubstring from here
-leastFrequentLetters(s) from here

hw3 pre-release
Note: we encourage you to not start the hw yet, but rather to focus on quiz3-practice and then on hw3-practice.  Starting the hw early will most likely cost you time and energy and increase stress while decreasing learning.  Even so, here is a pre-release of some of the problems that will appear on hw3 tomorrow:
-patternedMessage() from here
-encodeRightLeftRouteCipher() + decodeRightLeftRouteCipher() from here
-bonus:getEvalSteps(expr) from here
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Transferring to 15-110
Hi all.  Congrats on wrapping up hw2!  And great job, with 375+ of you scoring 100+ on the hw!  Kudos!  Plus, you are now 20% of the way through 15-112 hw's!  Woohoo!
 
By now, with quiz1, hw1, quiz2, and hw2 completed, you should have a fair idea of whether or not 15-112 is right for you, or if perhaps 15-110 might be a better fit.
 
If you are considering moving to 15-110, today is a fine day to do that!  You can make the move today without a grade penalty, and while you'd have to catch up a bit in that course, it's still early enough that you could do it.
 
Of course, you are most welcome to stay in 15-112, and we will do everything we can to support you and help you be as successful as possible here, while maintaining a healthy balance and hopefully having some fun.
 
But for some of you, 15-110 is surely a better fit for this semester.  If you are in that group, then the sooner you move to 15-110 the better, so you can catch up and thrive in that course.
 
If you are interested in making the move, please contact Professor Dilsun Kaynar (dilsun@cs.cmu.edu) asap.  And best of luck!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Please be certain to make your posts private!
A student just posted part of their solution code in a course-wide public post.  I deleted it, hopefully before it was emailed to everyone, but still....
 
First, if you get that email, please just delete it.
 
Second, come on folks, please be careful and please mark your posts as private.  And then please also place them in the student-questions folder rather than the official course announcements folder.
 
Thanks.

David

Please show up (on time) to your scheduled sessions with your CA's
Hi all.  Our CA's are wonderful (truly!).   But they are also very busy CMU students, just like you.  So please be respectful of their time, and please be sure to show up (on time, too!) to meetings and small-group sessions that you schedule with them.
 
Thanks.

David

Final exam dates (up to Mon 21-Dec) / Optional Lecture #2 (11am today) / And more
Hi all.  I hope you are off to a splendid start to this lovely Sunday morning!  With that, a few notes du jour:
 
Important Final Exam Information
The registrar and our dean have asked us to make this very clear:  final exams may run as late as Mon 21-Dec (which is a CMU-wide make-up date for anyone missing an exam for a university-approved reason, such as a conflict with another exam).  Note:  do not make travel plans that would make you miss your final exams.  Alternate finals will not be provided to students who are not here, except for pre-approved (in writing, by Mark or by me) absences due to university-approved conflicts, which are rare.

Re-read that last bit, please
Please be certain that you understand when you have to be here for finals!  It is very late this semester (something we have no control over -- the university assigns our final exam date, time, and location to us).

Kudos to the hw2 early starters!
175 of you have 100-or-higher on hw2 already.  Great job!  It's great to wake up on a Sunday with your 15-112 hw already completed.  Woohoo!

Optional Lecture #2 is at 11am today
It is in Hamburg Hall, room 1502.  Hamburg Hall is here (where the Heinz School is, on Forbes Ave, not far from GHC).  There will be a CA-led reprise, as usual, for those who cannot attend.  Look to piazza for details.

Hw2 integral hint
For any given call to integral(), do you know how many times you have to loop?  Hmmm...  Also, be very thoughtful about how the imprecision of floats can impact your answer!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Learn about using functions as parameters... at OH!
Hi all.  Many of you have questions about how to use functions as parameters, specifically on how the first parameter "f" to integral() works.
 
This was covered in lecture, both in the bisection function and again in the derivative function, and then there's a good hint in the integral() problem writeup.
 
Even so, it's confusing.  So where to go for help?
 
Piazza?  Not really.  This is better discussed in person.
 
So, where?  OFFICE HOURS, that's where.  And OH is going on right now, and will continue until 10pm tonight.  Of course, there's also tomorrow, but that's leaving things to the last minute.

Better to go today.
 
You don't need to be there for hours on end.  Just get your questions answered and then go have some fun on this Saturday night.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Write the code! / attend OH / in-class CT / quiz2 grades / hw2 / etc
Hi all.  I hope you are keeping a sunny disposition on this rainy day!  And now, a few announcements:
 
Write the code!
The only way to learn to code it to write the code yourself.  The only way to prove to yourself you know it is to write it.  So while lecture and recitations and review sessions are helpful (we sure hope!), nothing but nothing can replace you writing the code yourself.  So:  do it!  Write the quiz-practice problems from scratch until they are fairly easy for you to do.  Then move on to the hw-practice problems, again from scratch, until those are relatively easy for you.  And then, and only then, move on to the hw problems.  If you cannot easily write the practice problems, you have not learned the material well enough, and you really need to practice and learn it before doing the hw problems.

Attend OH
OH was nearly empty yesterday.  Which is fine for the many of you who are thriving, with high grades, strong understanding, and no real issues at this point.  But what about the many others of you who could use some help, or in some cases who can use lots of help?  If you are in those groups, get to OH, and the earlier in the week the better.  Unsurprisingly, queues will grow considerably as the deadline approaches.

CT from Section Points contest in class
That was fun!  And here you go:
def p(s): print(s, end=" ")

def ct1(x):
    while (x > 0):
        for y in range(2,4):
            x -= y**2
    return x
print(ct1(14))

def ct2(x):
    z = 13
    for y in range(x, x//2, -2):
        z = (z + y) % 17
    return z
print(ct2(15))

def ct3(x):
    z = 1
    for y in range(-1234, 5678):
        z = max(z, x**2 - y**2)
    return z
print(ct3(13))

def ct4(x):
    x = x+(x//2)%4%5%6
    x = x%(x//2)+4+5+6
    return x
print(ct4(5))

def ct5():
    global min, max
    min = max
    max = min
    return(min(3,4)**max(3,4))
print(ct5())
Quiz2 Grades
Thanks to our awesome CA's (thanks, awesome CA's!!!), quiz2's are graded and available in autolab.  The median was a solid 94.  Here is a histogram of scores:


Graded quiz2 pickup
You can pick up your graded quiz2's at OH on Monday and Tuesday nights.  Highly suggested!

Grading questions --> Anqi (acong)
If you think the grading on quizzes, hw's, or exams is correct (as it nearly always is), but you are not sure you understand the grading, then please talk to your CA's.  But if you think there may be a grading error (which does happen on occasion, if rarely), or if you have other grading questions or concerns, then you should first talk to Anqi (acong).

hw2 autograder is released
Have fun, and good luck!

str(n) is ok for the play112 bonus problem
You cannot use str in general on hw2, but you may use it for play112(), if you elect to do that bonus problem.

Little help on bonus problems
So you know:  in general, we provide little to no help for bonus problems.  For those, you are largely on your own.   Enjoy the challenge!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Autograder release policy
Hi all.  Since many of you are asking:  it is imperative that you do not develop an over-reliance on the autograder.  It is not a debugger for you, but simply a grader.  To that end, there are two trends you will observe:  each week, the autograder will be posted later in the hw cycle.   Also, each week you will have fewer total submissions to use.
 
In any case:  we will always post to piazza when the autograder is available.
 
Please do not post asking when that will happen.  We promise to post when it does.
 
Meanwhile, the whole point of delaying the autograder is for you to steadily increase your own code testing ability, so that you become a self-reliant, independent coder as quickly as possible.
 
So:  don't wait for the autograder!  Be self-reliant!  Be independent!  Test your code!  Test it well!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Waitlist update
Hi all.  We just admitted many students off the waitlists (woohoo).  If you were one of those students, I just sent confirmation email to you.
 
If you did not receive such an email, there is still room for you, only not in the section/lecture you are waitlisted for.  You have 2 options.
 
Option #1: sit tight
 
Again, literally everyone who is participating will eventually get into the course, though it may take weeks, but it will happen.  So you can just sit tight and you will get in.
 
Option #2:  switch sections/lectures
 
At this point, space is available first-come, first-served, to anyone who has been actively participating in the course (which means you have grades on quiz1 and hw1, or an email from me saying to add you even though you don't).
 
To claim a slot, come to my office (no email) by 6pm today.  After that, I will check my emails.
 
Here are spaces available at this minute (note that you *must* match the lecture to the section:
 
Lecture 1:
  EE: 1 open
  H: 1 open
Lecture 2:
  II: 3 open
  J: 2 open
  JJ: 3 open
  K: 2 open
  KK: 3 open
  L: 1 open
  LL: 1 open
  M: 1 open
  MM: 7 open
  NN: 6 open
  P: 1 open
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Extended-Time Protocol update
Hi all. For those affected:  We are changing the Extended-Time protocol today.  Please follow this new policy today.
 
To take a pre-approved Extended-Time quiz, show up at Mark Stehlik's office (GHC 6205) any time today from 10am to 3pm.  You will take the quiz in a nearby quiet office, and return it to Mark's office when you are done.

Also, while obvious, it is worth noting that from the time you pick up your quiz until the time you drop it off, you are under normal quiz proctoring rules.  You may not talk to anyone, nor use any computers or calculators or phones, nor access any books or online resources, etc.  Obvious stuff, but important for us all to follow.
 
Good luck today.
 
David

quiz2 stuff, graded materials, optional lectures 1+2, cloudcoder, hw2 bonus hints
Hi all.  Some announcements for your Thursday evening:
 
Extended Time protocol for quiz2
I will be unavailable for extended-time quizzes tomorrow, so we'll try this:  if you qualify for extended-time (with a letter from Larry Powell), show up at the start of any quiz lab from 9:30am to 3:30pm (not 4;30pm), not just your own.  You will be given a quiz which you will take in the Engineering Library in Wean Hall (just like last week).  You'll have 90 minutes to return it to the next recitation.  Good luck!

CT for quiz2
Sorry, but there were technical problems with the dynamic version of the CT.  But it's just like the static version, of course, so you're fine.  If you want, try changing the constants a little bit.  That's what I'll do, after all, in making the quiz.

week1 on quiz2
As announced in class, quiz2 will contain at least one question from week1.  It can be anything, from the practice or the hw or the notes, and perhaps with a small twist.  The week2 material on quiz2, though, will be exactly taken from quiz2-practice.

Graded quiz1 returns + quiz2 returns
Graded quiz1's will be returned in quiz lab tomorrow.  By contrast, graded quiz2's will be available in OH on Monday and Tuesday nights next week.

Hw1 grades released
You can find yours on Autolab.  Be sure to read the CA's comments!

Optional Lecture #1 Reprise, tomorrow (Friday), 6-8pm, Porter Hall A21
This is a CA-led duplicate talk from the first optional lecture, for those who missed it.  Everyone is invited.  Fun times!

Optional Lecture #2, Sunday, 11am-1pm, Hamburg Hall 1502
Another fun topic (which?  we'll see!).  As usual, we'll have a CA-led reprise for those who can't make it.

Cloudcoder week2
Kelly says Cloudcoder has updated problems now for week 2.  Enjoy!

carrylessMultiply (only non-negatives)
Please note that carrylessMultiply is only non-negative integers (as suggested but not explicitly stated by the writeup).  The writeup will reflect this in the morning.  Sorry for the confusion.

"abc" + "def" == "abcdef"
This fact may be useful for the play112 bonus.  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David

My OH to 1:30pm today
Hi all.  I will be doing lecture 2 again this week (and next!), so for now, my OH has to end by then, so 1:30pm today.  Thanks, and sorry for the late notice.
 
David

Important 15-112 status issues (please read, re: drops/adds/waitlist/15-110 xfers)
Hi all.  Here are some important announcements regarding 15-112 status for many of you:
 
1) Please drop if you plan to drop (so we can enroll waitlisted students)
Some of you are no longer participating in the course, and plan to drop, but have not done so.  If you are in that position, we respectfully ask that you please go to SIO and formally drop the course now, so that students on the waitlist can be formally enrolled this week.  Thanks, and good luck with your other courses this semester!

2) Late addition protocol
For those who added this course late:  you need to see me asap!  And you are not exempted from earlier work (quiz1, hw1), though in some cases we will grant extensions for you to submit them soon (no later than Sunday 20-Sep in any case).  Also, all future deadlines apply to you, including quiz2 tomorrow and hw2 on Sunday.  And be sure to sign up for piazza and read all the announcements you missed.  And be sure to speak with your CA's from your assigned section asap, and to watch videos of all the lectures you missed.  With that said, welcome aboard, and good luck!

3) Waitlist status
For those on the waitlist:  we will try to clear waitlists today, tomorrow, and Monday.  That said, not everyone will get in right away (sorry).  However, the good news is that given our current numbers, everyone who is currently fully participating in the course will eventually get enrolled in the course.  But that may take a while, and it may require switching MW section times and/or TR lecture times.  In any case, eventually, we'll get you all enrolled.  Woohoo.

4) 15-110 xfer status
Some of you have determined that 15-110 would be a better fit for you this semester.  In that case, you should talk to Prof. Dilsun Kaynar (dilsun@cs.cmu.edu) right away, today, and then formally transfer into 15-110.  You can do that now without penalty to your grade.  If this option suits you, then the sooner you do it, the better off you will be, as 15-110 covers material we do not cover, and you would not want to miss too much of that course (none, ideally, but the less the better).  If you do switch:  good luck!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Volleyball, hw2, idlex, OH queues, Academic Dev't, Zelle book, Robotics club, race cars!

Hi all. Here are some announcements for this summery Wednesday evening:

* Looking for a fun break right now?
The varsity volleyball team, with 112 members on it, has a home game right now (started at 7pm, still going now!) against St. Vincent. So they say: ?Invite everyone as we are grateful for anyone who comes to support us! We want a full house!? Have fun cheering your classmates on to victory (and at 6-0, they do win a lot!).

* Interested in seeing hw2?
It is posted! Have fun!

* Want line numbers in IDLE?
Then you want to use idlex. It also provides some other cool features. Read about it and download it here.

* Do you like a lot of attention?
Office Hours queues are very low, sometimes empty, in the early parts of the week. Go then and get some 1-on-1 tutoring!
 
* Want more 1-on-1 tutoring? (Academic Development)
Academic Development will be offering support for 15-112 on Sunday and Monday nights from 8:30-11:00 p.m. in both the Donner and Mudge Reading Rooms. This is a great, free resource that you should use. Enjoy!

* Want to buy a good old-fashioned printed book on Python?
If so, try this one (which I recommend):
Python Programming: An Introduction to Computer Science, 2nd Ed. by John Zelle

* Interested in robotics?
Adam Zeloof, VP of the CMU Robotics Club, azz@andrew.cmu.edu, says this: ?In order to inform potentially interested Freshman about Carnegie?s Robotics Club, I was hoping you could make a quick announcement about the General Body Meeting, this Friday the 11th at 5:00 pm in DH 2210. The meeting is a general-purpose introduction to the club and its various projects, and will include a tour of the club, with the option to pay dues and become a member afterwards. We encourage all interested students to join us for an hour or so.? It?s a fine opportunity to start putting your newfound coding skills to practical use!

* Like building really fast cars?
Eric Reeder, a VP of CMU SAE Racing says: ?Carnegie Mellon Formula SAE Racing is recruiting new members.? If interested, contact Eric Reeder <ereeder@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Carpe diem!

David

Update: quiz2-practice and hw2-practice posted, rest of hw2 coming soon
Hi all.  Quiz2-practice and hw2-practice now have all the problems there (though later today I'll add dynamic-generation of new code tracing to quiz2-practice, and those nicer new-style writeup formats to hw2-practice, but the problems will remain the same as posted now).
 
Hw2 has those 3 problems that were already posted, so anyone who really wants to get started on hw2 could do so.  We'll get the rest of it posted asap, sometime later tonight.
 
Carpe diem.

David

112 Section Points and this week's nano-contest
Hi all. I hope your second week is off to a brilliant start!  And now for something completely different...

* 112 Section Points

To have some fun while promoting good study habits, we will try a new thing this semester: 112 Section Points!!!

We will have various events during the semester where you can win points for your section. We?ll provide more details later, but for now, it?s quite simple: have fun, learn a lot, and win some points!

Besides endless fame and glory, the section with the highest point total at the end of the semester will be duly rewarded, not with a grade increase (though that may happen as a side-effect!), but with some other fun and totally worthwhile reward that we haven?t dreamed up yet.

* This week?s Nano-Contest

In the coming weeks, we?ll have contests that include as many people as possible
in lecture. This week, to get started, we?ll keep it simple, so each section gets one person to represent them tomorrow, though everyone will participate in recitation today.

So: today in recitation you?ll spend a few minutes (no more) on a nano-contest of your CA?s design, where everyone will practice writing nthPrime or some tiny variant of it, and use this to select your section?s representative in tomorrow?s in-lecture contest.

Tomorrow, each section gets to have one person represent them in the contest in lecture (and we?ll do this once per lecture). Each contestant should have a laptop. They will be given a similar problem (like nthPrime, but with a twist), and the first one to solve it wins (for their section!) +5 points for winning, and +5 points for being the first to ever win points, for a total of +10 points for their section. Woohoo!

Again, the point is to have some fun while promoting good study habits.

Let?s keep this friendly and have fun with it! :-)

Go team!  And... Carpe diem!

David

pre-release of quiz2-practice, hw2-practice, and hw2 problems
Hi all.  Those of you looking to do some practice should start by reproducing the examples in the notes from first principles.  In particular, be sure you can very easily and quickly write nthPrime using fasterIsPrime.
 
Having said that, some of you may wish to see the exercises in pre-release of quiz2-practice, hw2-practice, and hw2.  These should be available late tonight or early tomorrow, but for those of you looking for a head start, here are 3 problems from each of them:
 
******************************
quiz2-practice
******************************
 
digitCount(n)
Write the function digitCount that takes a possibly-negative int and returns the number of digits in it. So, digitCount(12323) returns 5, digitCount(0) returns 1, and digitCount(-111) returns 3. One way you could do this would be to return len(str(abs(n))), but you cannot do that, since you may not use strings here! This can be solved with logarithms, or by simply repeatedly removing the ones digit until you cannot. Note that this function is listed first because it may be useful for some of the functions below (or not, depending on how you implement your solutions).
 
hasConsecutiveDigits(n)
Write the function hasConsecutiveDigits(n) that takes a possibly-negative int value n and returns True if that number contains two consecutive digits that are the same, and False otherwise.
 
nthPerfectNumber(n)
Write the function nthPerfectNumber that takes a non-negative integer n and returns the nth perfect number, starting at n=0, where a number is perfect if it is the sum of its positive divisors less than itself.  For example, 6 is perfect because 6 = 1 + 2 + 3.  Also, 28 is perfect because 28 = 1 + 2 + 4 + 7 + 14.  The next one is 496, then 8128.
 
******************************
hw2-practice
******************************
 
carrylessAdd(x, y)
First, read the first page (page 44) from here about Carryless Arithmetic. Fun! Then, write the function carrylessAdd(x, y) that takes two non-negative integers x and y and returns their carryless sum. As the paper demonstrates, carrylessAdd(785, 376) returns 51.
 
mostFrequentDigit(n)
Write the function mostFrequentDigit(n), that takes a non-negative integer n and returns the digit from 0 to 9 that occurs most frequently in it, with ties going to the smaller digit.
 
nthLeftTruncatablePrime(n)
Write the function nthLeftTruncatablePrime(n). See here for details. So nthLeftTruncatablePrime(0) returns 2, and nthLeftTruncatablePrime(10) returns 53.
 
******************************
hw2
******************************
 
carrylessMultiply(x, y)
Similarly, write carrylessMultiply(x,y). The same paper shows that carrylessMultiply(643, 59) returns 417. Hint: it may help if you do this differently than usual long multiplication. Instead of working by rows in the output, work by columns. So first compute all the ones digit values, and sum those mod 10. Then compute all the tens digit values, and sum those mod 10. And so on.
 
nearestKaprekarNumber(n)
Background: a Kaprekar number is a non-negative integer, the representation of whose square can be split into two parts (where the right part is not zero) that add up to the original number again. For instance, 45 is a Kaprekar number, because 45**2 = 2025 and 20+25 = 45. You can read more about Kaprekar numbers here. The first several Kaprekar numbers are: 1, 9, 45, 55, 99, 297, 703, 999 , 2223, 2728,... With this in mind, write the function nearestKaprekarNumber(n) that takes a numeric value n and returns the Kaprekar number closest to n, with ties going to smaller value. For example, nearestKaprekarNumber(49) returns 45, and nearestKaprekarNumber(51) returns 55. And since ties go to the smaller number, nearestKaprekarNumber(50) returns 45. 
Note: as you probably guessed, this also cannot be solved by counting up from 0, as that will not be efficient enough to get past the autograder.
 
nthCarolPrime(n)
Write the function nthCarolPrime(n), which takes a non-negative int and returns the nth Carol Prime, which is a prime number of the form ((2**k - 1)**2 - 2) for some value positive int k. For example, if k equals 3, ((2**3 - 1)**2 -2) equals 47, which is prime, and so 47 is a Carol Prime. The first several Carol primes are: 
   7, 47, 223, 3967, 16127, 1046527, 16769023,... 
As such, nthCarolPrime(0) returns 7. 
Note: You must use a reasonably efficient approach that quickly works up to n==9, which will return a 12-digit answer! In particular, this means you cannot just edit nthPrime (or fasterIsPrime) to call isCarolPrime instead of isPrime.
 
Good luck, and have fun.  And...  Carpe diem!

David

Please make your posts private , and do not respond to non-private posts
Hi all.  When students accidentally post questions publicly, and hence spam everyone, please do not answer those questions.
 
For example, a student just did so, and while they had the best of intentions, they also provided an incorrect answer.  Ugh.
 
Second, it promotes incorrect use of the system.  The private-only rule is to protect you from the massive flow of questions we see every day.  Already there have been 677 piazza contributions, and we're just getting started!
 
We have 40 awesome CA's who will promptly, accurately, and happily answer your questions on piazza.  Please mark your questions as private for them, and please do not answer questions your classmates accidentally forget to mark as private.
 
Also, please remember to place your questions in the "student-questions" folder and not in the official "announcements" folder.
 
Thanks!
 
David

A few more hw1 and quiz1 things
Hi all.  In response to your very good questions, here are a few more notices about hw1 and quiz1:
 
wed/thu night != small-group sessions
Do not confuse these.  The Wed/Thu sessions are optional, and do not count towards hw1!  The CA-led small-group sessions in hw1 are different, and are not optional!  Whether or not you attended a Wed/Thu night session, you need to attend a small-group session with one of the CA's from your assigned recitation.  Please contact them directly for details, if you have not done so already.

newcomers still have hw1 due tomorrow
Some of you have joined 15-112 in the past day (yikes! and welcome!!!).  I have sent an email to that group, but just to be really sure:  you still have hw1 due tomorrow night along with everyone else!  Good luck on it!

graded quizzes are returned in recitation
You'll get your physical copies of your graded quizzes returned in recitation on Wednesday.  This will be the case in general.

bonus autograder wrapper function
Some of you may notice that the autograder for the bonus contains a weird "wrapper" function.  To clarify, this is code the autograder injects into your own code, to help with autograding.  Further, this is the exact function in question:
def findIntRootsOfCubicSortedWrapper(a,b,c,d):
    return tuple(sorted(findIntRootsOfCubic(a,b,c,d)))
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

More autograder info
Hi all.  A few more important items about the autograder:
 
Only your last submission counts!
You have up to 20 submissions, but only your last one counts, even if an earlier one had a higher score.  So be sure to make your last one your best one!

pass test cases != pass autograder
The autograder uses test cases that are different from those that we provide for you.  This week, it is just changing the numbers.  In future weeks, it will also test for edge cases that we dont' cover in the test functions (if we even provide test functions).  In any case, you should know that just because you pass the test cases you are using, that does not mean you will pass all the test cases that the autograder is using.

Watch the video
Some of you clearly have not watched the video and are posting piazza questions that show that this is the case (question: how do I find out if my submission passed?).  Sigh.  Please watch the video.  Here it is.

read the buggy test case report!
When your code does not pass the autograder, it tells you exactly which case failed, the expected result, and your (observed) result.  Be sure to scroll up in the feedback to find that report!  It is useful information!!!

The test cases are correct!  Even for cosinesZeroCount!
Many of you have posted here that there is an error in one of the test cases for cosinesZeroCount.  There is not, the test cases are correct.  But you have to read the question very carefully to see why...

No lists or tuples this week
This mainly pertains to the bonus, but you can't use sorted(coeffs) to sort them.  This is not a major issue, as there are only 3 values to sort.  But you'll have to do it with out lists or tuples.
Manual grades (like ca-led session scores) after deadline
All manual grades (CA-led session scores, anything handwritten, style scores, etc) are only computed and added after the autograding deadline.  For now, they will appear blank in your score report.

Good luck again! 
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Quiz1 grades + Updated Brython + Optional Lecture + PACE + Project Ignite + more
Hi all. Here are some announcements for this lovely, summery day:
 
Quiz1 Grades
The CA's graded all the quiz1's yesterday (thanks, CA's!!!), and are posted on autolab.  And the results were very strong. The median was a solid 85, and there were 70 perfect 100's. Woohoo! If you scored well below median, don't panic! But do take action! In particular, go to OH today and tomorrow and get some extra help. Here is a histogram of quiz1 grades:


OH is lightly attended (hint, hint)
This week, the CA's office hours (OH) is lightly attended. That will change as the hw's get harder and as students figure out how awesomely helpful OH is. But for now, with light to empty queues, this creates a great opportunity for students who need some extra help getting started. OH runs today from 2 to 10pm, and again tomorrow from 2 to 10pm. That's 16 hours, much of which (especially away from the hw1 deadline) will probably have light queues. So: if you need help, get to OH today, and get some guided practice and tutoring!

Updated Brython
The Brython team fixed numerous bugs we filed with them, including the //-precedence bug.  Woohoo.  To get the updated Brython, you may need to clear your browser's history cache, then reload the course website.  To be sure you did it right, try print(2*3//4).  If it prints 1, you're in luck.  If it prints 0, try again.  Also, they apparently fixed the weird error when using math without importing it. Now you get a name error, as hoped for.  Sweet.

Wrong Rohan!  (Our Asst Head CA is rnvarma @ andrew.cmu.edu)
When trying to contact our Asst Head CA, Rohan Varma, a number of you have sent email to rohanv @ andrew.  That is the wrong Rohan Varma!  There are two of them at CMU, and ours is rnvarma @ andrew.  Please make a note of it!

Optional lecture is Monday, 11am-1pm, GHC 4307
Should be fun!   It's entirely optional, and will not impact your 15-112 grade in any way.

Optional lecture reprise: TBD
For those who wish to attend the optional lecture but can't make that day/time, we will have a CA-led reprise lecture on the same topic(s).  The day/time of the reprise will be posted here soon, but you should expect it to be within a few days of the original lecture.

Community Service / PACE
Several of you asked where the website is for PACE.  Here you go:
http://www.cmu.edu/studentactivities/pace/
Project Ignite
Project Ignite is a promising new student-led initiative which may have opportunities for students with 112-level skills.  For those so inclined, please see the appended message.

---------- Forwarded message ----------
From: Eric Reeder <ereeder@andrew.cmu.edu>

To all current CMU students:
Do you like MENTORING? Do you do PROJECTS? Want to get involved in a NEW ORGANIZATION? Check out Project Ignite! We are pairing CMU students with local high schoolers in a semester long adventure of multidisciplinary projects! We are looking for excited CMU students of any major to share their passions with the local Pittsburgh community and inspire high schoolers to pursue these passions in college. For more information, please visit our website, www.projectignitecmu.org.

If you're even vaguely interested in this program, please send an email to Eric Reeder at ereeder@andrew.cmu.edu so you can be added to our recruitment mailing list, and also come to our info meeting on Tuesday, September 8th at 5pm in Wean 5409. You may also fill out our Project Advisor application, which can be found on our website.
Thanks!
Eric Reeder <ereeder@andrew.cmu.edu>
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

"Where is my bug?" --> OH
Hi all.  Some of you are posting a large block of code with question:  "where is my bug?"  Or: "please fix my code".  Or even nothing at all, just the code.
 
While surely you meant no harm, that is not what piazza is for, and we do not answer such questions.  In short, we will not debug for you.  Not because we don't want to help.   No!  We *do* want to help!!!!  But debugging for you would not help you at all, and in fact it would be gravely injurious to you.  Debugging is central to coding.  You cannot code without debugging.  So you simply must learn to debug your own code.  And we will not deprive you of that experience!
 
If you have a specific question (like "why is this printing 'abc' on line 10, where I thought it would print 'def' because ...), then that's great for piazza.
 
But if you are just generally stuck, and you don't have so much of a question as more of a general need for help, then piazza is not your best bet.  In that case, go to office hours, and talk to a living, breathing, blue-hoodied, expert-tutoring, endlessly-helpful CA!!!!
 
If you cannot debug your code, we will not debug it for you, but will teach you how to debug, so you can debug your own code.  But that must be done in person.  So go to OH if you need that.

Carpe diem!

David

Autograder info
Hi all.  Here are some important notes about the autograder for everyone to read:

Please do not submit hw's before we post saying the autograder is live!
Some of you have already submitted hw1, but you did it before we announced that the autograder is live.  This is really inconvenient for us (and for you!), because you'll be using an unreleased test version of the autograder, which might lead to all kinds of confusion.  Please, do not submit hw's until we say you can.

Please watch this video on how to use the autograder
There are some important things you should know to use the autograder properly.  Watching this short (5-6min) video can save you many hours of grief!  So please watch it now.  Also, note that the way I reload the frame at about 3:20 (using the reload button) is not so good, and it's better then way I do it at about 6:00 (right-click, reload frame).

Test your code thoroughly before submitting
The autograder is not a debugging service.  Debugging is a critical skill that you must develop in this course -- and remember, in real life there is no such thing as an autograder, so you can't learn to depend on one!  Thus:  you should be very confident all your code works before submitting.  This week, you get 20 submissions, which is basically infinite (and a bit ridiculous, but alas, it's the first week...).  But next week you will get far fewer, and soon you'll only get a few submissions.  So you have to use each submission carefully, being sure to make your code as correct as possible before submitting.  In general, if you exhaust your submissions, we do not grant more, though we typically add a few extra submissions for the late day.

Autograder release date
To further decrease dependency on the autograder, we do not release the autograder until late in the hw cycle.  Typically, the autograder will not be released until Saturday (sometimes late in the day Saturday, sometimes perhaps Sunday).  Of course, the whole point is that you should not depend on the autograder, and not wait for it to be released.  Long before then, you can do the hw, pass what test cases we distribute, and also add and pass your own carefully considered test cases.  That way, you are thoroughly confident in the correctness of your code before submitting to the autograder.  That is the correct way to use the autograder.

Ok, then....  If you watched the video, then the hw autograder is live!
If you watched the video, then you may start submitting your hw1.  Good luck!

Problems?  Try piazza or OH!
If you cannot submit hw1, or you don't understand the feedback, or you have any other issues, post your questions on piazza, or go to today's OH.  We have 16 hours of OH over the weekend, so you should be able to get your questions answered!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Quiz1 announcements
Hi all.  Here are a couple quiz1-related announcements:
 
Quiz locations are different from recitation locations!
Please check the syllabus.  Your WF listing will include two rooms on the right.  The first is for W recitations, the second is for F proctored quizzes (that's today).  Basically, go to GHC 52xx (the computer labs) today.

Attend your assigned time!
We will have full rooms most of the day, so you have to attend your assigned time.

Extended time protocol
For those who submitted a letter from Larry Powell qualifying for extended-time:  to receive extra time, you should come to my office any time between 1pm and 5pm today, and you will take your quiz to the Roger Sorrells Engineering & Science Library, WEH 4400.  The quiz is nominally 45 minutes, so you may have up to 90 minutes.  You will self-proctor, but a CA or I may come by from time to time to proctor as well.  Alternatively, you may take your quiz at your assigned time and location, but then you will not receive extended time.  If you have time conflicts during the 1pm-5pm time, email me asap, listing the nature of the conflicts and all the times you are available today and tomorrow.

Good luck!!!
I've seen many of you studying hard and preparing well for this quiz (and kudos for that!!!).  You should be fine.  Even so, good luck!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

3-Sep Notices: 2 polls, a big bug, piazza etiquette, #ignore_rest, and more!
Hi all.   I hope your days are off to a fine start!   Here's today's batch of announcements:
 
Optional Lecture poll
If you are interested, please fill out this optional poll this morning (3-Sep), listing all the times you can possibly make, so I can place the room reservation soon.  Thanks.

"Improve the visualizer" optional poll
We hope you are finding the tool you get when you press the "visualize" button in the course notes helpful.  We are seeking ways to make that tool even more helpful.  We ask for your optional feedback to that end.  If you are so inclined, please fill out this optional poll, and please be thoughtful, and clever, and dream up ways we can make that tool super-helpful for you.  Thanks!

Big Brython Bug:   a*b//c
This is a real problem.  Right now, in Brython, (a * b // c) evaluates incorrectly to (a * (b // c)) rather than ((a * b) // c).  Yikes!  We have filed a bug report with the Brython team.  They are good about fixing things.  I imagine they will get this fixed asap, and we can get an updated version posted to our course website within a few days.  I hope.  Meanwhile, to be safe, just add extra parentheses...

Please use andrew id's and andrew email
We have many students with very similar names, sometimes with identical names.  But everyone has a unique andrew id.  And so we run our course internally only by andrew id.  So please always use your andrew id when communicating with us, and please use your andrew email as well.  Gmail accounts may be convenient in general, but then we can't tell who you are on our roster, in Autolab, et cetera.  So: please use andrew email, and in any case, please always include your andrew id in all correspondence.  Thanks!

Please do not post responses to our piazza posts
If you post a response to an official announcement, you spam everyone.  Ugh.  We are very happy for you to contact us anytime about anything, but please make your own private post (to Instructors), and don't add anything to official course-wide announcements.  Thanks!

Understand #ignore_rest in hw1.py
Partway down the hw1.py file is a line with the comment #ignore_rest.  That is a very important line.  Everything above that line is autograded.  Everything below that line is ignored by the autograder.  So place your test code, and anything else that's not a part of your solution, below the line.  And be sure all your solutions, and the helper functions they require, are all above the line.

Maintain your balance!
Just a friendly reminder.  Get enough sleep.  Really.  And exercise, at least a bit, every day.  And socialize a bit.  And eat some healthy food now and then.  Setting up good patterns now will make an enormous difference for you as the semester progresses.  This course, and probably all your other courses, will get more intense.  Build the right life patterns now in preparation for then.
 
Carpe diem!

David

Announcements du jour (extra OH, hw1, and more!)
Hi all.  Here is the next batch of announcements, some of them rather timely.  I hope you are off to a good start!
 
Read the announcements!
There can be a lot of them, but it's really important that you read them entirely and carefully.

Extra OH reminder
CA's have extra OH today 10:30am to 12:30pm (that is, now), and I have extra OH today 1:30-2:30pm.

All week1 videos are available
The data + expr videos are also out there now.  Enjoy!  :-)

Hw1 is posted
Due Sunday at 10pm, as usual.

But... Don't start hw1 yet!!
For nearly all of you, it would be a mistake to even look at hw1 today.  Instead, focus on quiz1-practice, then hw1-practice, and only then think about hw1.  This way, you will in fact spend less total time, while securing a higher grade, and then with less stress.  Such good things!

Reminder: CA-led optional review sessions tonight and tomorrow night
These are duplicate sessions, 8pm each night, WEH 7500.  The room only holds 150, and we have over 3x that many, so we hope we get a large group tonight and another large group tomorrow night.  If everyone attends one night, well, there won't be enough seats...

Got setup issues?  Or other issues?
Then go to OH!  Today! Now, in fact!

Mac Tk setup issues
This is just for a few of you, if any, but: if you are on a Mac, and when you install Python3 you get a strange error about the wrong version of Tk, you can read this note about how to fix it.

Negatives and // and %
Be sure you understand how (a // b) and (a % b) work for negative a's.  For example:
-4//3 --> -2
-4 % 3 --> 2
You also need to know (a // b) for negative b's, but not (a % b) for negative b's.
Great (awful?) example of floating-point approximation
Run this in Brython:
    print(round(2.5))
You get 3, as you would hope and expect.  Now, run it again in standard Python3 (with IDLE or Sublime or whatever).  And...  You get 2.  Oh no!!!!  This is because 2.5 is not stored in Python 3 as exactly 2.5 but only very nearly 2.5, presumably something like 2.499999999999.  Yikes!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

A few notes and reminders (My OH tomorrow, CA OH today, your hw for today, etc)
Hi all.  Here are a few notes and reminders on this first day of class:
 
My extra OH tomorrow (1:30-2:30pm)
With the odd schedule this week, I'll have an extra hour of OH (Office Hours) tomorrow from 1:30 to 2:30pm.  See (some of) you then!

Your hw for today
We don't normally have same-day hw (never again, actually), but this week is special, and we do have hw for today, so you are ready for tomorrow's recitation:

Check out the course website.  Read the syllabus.

Install Python3 on your computer.  Go to OH if you have trouble.

Watch the "Functions" and "Conditionals" videos.
That's about 45 minutes of videos, in case you're curious.  Also, maybe play around with a few examples in Brython and/or Python.

Work in Groups!
It's just more fun and, if you are disciplined enough, more effective to study in groups, at least sometimes (and of course not on hw which is marked explicitly as SOLO...) .  And where to form a study group?  Why, at CA Office Hours....

CA Office Hours start at 6pm today!
In the GHC 5th Floor Teaching Commons, next to the Pausch Bridge.

Attend your assigned recitation tomorrow!
The syllabus now lists your assigned CA's along with their andrew id's (so you email them at andrew-id@andrew.cmu.edu).  Also, check out the staff pictures so you can identify them.

Have fun!
 
Carpe diem!

David

Just for waitlisted students: on piazza != off waitlist
Hi all.  Several of you have asked, so:  everyone is on piazza, including everyone on the waitlist.  This does not mean you are off the waitlist.  It just lets you participate in the course while you are on the waitlist.

We'll do our very best to clear the waitlists as quickly as possible.  Meanwhile, it's not a real problem, since can and should participate fully in the course like any other student.
 
Cheers.
 
David

Welcome to 15-112-f15 piazza!
Hi all.  Our piazza is now live!  Feel free to start asking questions!
 
Please remember to mark your questions as "private", and please place them in the "student-questions" folder and not the "announcements" folder.
 
Our announcements, such as this one, are the only messages that should be in the "announcements" folder.
 
Also, if you include code in your posts, please either place it in a code tag (using the "code" button), or attach it with Insert/File.  Please do not simply paste the code into your message.  It will not format correctly and it will be very hard for us to help you then.
 
And, again, please mark your posts as private.  Otherwise, you'll be spamming 470 classmates, and perhaps accidentally sharing your code with them, too.  Ugh and double ugh.
 
Welcome aboard, and good luck, and have fun!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

112-friends mailing list signup (please sign up today if interested!)
Hi all.  Sorry for this post-after-the-last-post, but I forgot to do this, and it's an important way for us to stay in contact with those of you who may be so inclined.  So:

Please fill out this optional form if you wish to receive occasional emails about 112-related information and opportunities that would hopefully be of interest to 112 alums, such as calls for CA applicants, or for 112++ content developers (summer internships and/or fall/spring courses), etc. We will not send very many emails to this list.

Thanks for your interest and support, and again, have a great summer!

Carpe diem.

David

Carpe Diem
 
Hi all.  This is the 12,024th and final piazza contribution for 15-112-s15.  Whew!  :-)

I completely agree with everything Prof Andersen said.  Congratulations and thanks to all of you, students and CA's, for making this course such a great joy to teach and to be part of.  Also, thanks again to Prof Andersen, who was a joy to co-teach with, and who made a huge positive impact on all aspects of the course this semester !  I look forward to co-teaching again hopefully very soon.
 
It has been such a joy working with all of you and watching you grow so much in such a short time. And your term projects are a strong testament to your hard-won programming prowess. Kudos!!!!
 
I hope you all enjoy a happy and restorative summer break, and that next semester and beyond goes swimmingly for all of you!
 
And please do keep in touch.  While I truly enjoyed teaching you how to program, I get perhaps even more joy hearing what you do with this after 112 (even long after)!  So go do it!  And then let us know!
 
Which brings us to the the end.  I sign nearly all my posts with "Carpe Diem".  Literally, "seize the day".  But what does it *mean*?  It means to live your life actively, not passively.  To decide who you want to be, and to take at least one step every single day to be closer to that person, to your own ideal self, whatever that means to you.  It means finding what you care about, and then doing something about it.  It means trying to make the world a better place, or at least trying every day to take one step in that direction, again according to whatever you think that means.  It does not mean being perfect, it does not mean never having bad days.  Be imperfect.  Have some bad days.  Just try, every day, as best you can, to be your best you.  And then accept what comes of it.  :-)
 
The world has so many problems, humanity has so many needs.  I am heartened by the firm knowledge that so many of you will be part of so many solutions to these problems, that you will satisfy so many needs, that the world will be such a better place thanks to you.  And in some cases, perhaps, you may even use some programming to make that happen.  :-)
 
May you all shine very brightly, and may you have lots of fun along the way.

Carpe diem.
 
David

Semester grades
Hi all.  Semester grades are now entered in FIO, and may take up to a day to make it into SIO where you can see them.  Overall, you did wonderfully, with a median semester score of 86.1, which is obviously superb.  Way to go!!!   Nearly 3/4ths of you received A's or B's as your semester grades, and 98% of you passed the course.  These are very solid numbers, and again they reflect your tremendous effort and great learning all semester.
 
Now, you should know:  it is very hard to draw the lines between letter grades.  With so many students, no matter where we draw a line, there will be students just barely below that line.  But if we move it down for them, then there will still be students just barely below that new line.  So, unfortunately, the line must be drawn somewhere reasonable -- in keeping with historic norms for the course and the department, taking as much into account as we can about this semester's students -- and then some students must barely miss clearing the line.  If you are in this situation, then please know that we empathize with your situation.  We understand that it would be deflating to put so much effort into a course and then just barely miss the next-higher grade.  And while we are not going to change semester grades, we are very happy to meet (this week, over the summer over Skype, in the fall, whenever) to discuss your experience so that next time, in some other course, you more effectively earn a grade that better reflects your effort, your goals, and your ambitions.
 
Also, while grades do matter to some degree, they most assuredly are not everything.  Learning matters more than grades.  And you all learned a great deal.  And achievement also matters more than grades.  Your term projects are fine achievements which you can rightfully be proud of, and that's just the beginning of what most of you will achieve with your coding prowess.  The point is, even if your grade is not what you had hoped for, you have already laid a solid foundation upon which you can build a strong academic and professional career.
 
Great job, everyone!!!!
 
David

Code from today's optional lecture
Hi all.  Thanks for those who attended today's talk.  It was darn fun.
 
Here's the code we wrote.  It's definitely super toxic, cutting every corner, intentionally and otherwise including lots of deeply suspect design decisions.  Definitely not useful for anything more than humor.
 
That said, here it is:  ourLanguage.py
 
Enjoy!  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David

AMG grades now in autolab
Hi all.  The AMG grades are now calculated and available in Autolab.
 
As we have discussed and is noted in the syllabus, the highest AMG grade possible is a C, so if your semester average is 70 or higher, then AMG does not apply to you, so you will see 0 or -1 in your AMG score.  This does not mean you scored 0 or -1 -- it just means that you will get at least a C without AMG, so you can ignore AMG.  Good job!
 
Again, Prof Andersen and I will meet on Monday to review all the grades, and to carefully review all the edge or bubble cases.  We'll post back here when more info is available.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Final exam grades, final exam viewing (tomorrw, 1:30-4:20pm), and semester grades
Hi all.  Thanks to the super-human grading of our awesome CA's, the finals are all graded (well, all the ones that have been taken so far, at least).
 
The median is a super-strong 85.8, which is wonderful, and a true testament to your fabulous hard work all semester.  Kudos!!!!
 
The top score was 103.6.  Stupendous!
 
Now, as for viewing your graded exams, a few key things:
You may not view or discuss your exams until after 2pm tomorrow (after everyone has taken it or at least is currently taking it).
You may not take your exam out of a professor's office.  We keep it on file for a few years.
You are most welcome to view, though, of course keeping it in our office.
For that, you may stop by my office tomorrow (Thursday) from 1:30pm to 3pm, or by Prof Andersen's office also tomorrow from 3pm to 4:20pm.  If you can't make those times, then you may have to view them either sometime next week or next semester.  Don't worry, because if there was an error, we can fix it at any time.
As for errors:  there may be errors, but you should know that there are very, very few errors in grading.  And we will not scour your exam with you to find every possible tiny error, nor will we discuss the finer points of the rubric.  We are very happy to discuss any serious grading errors that may have occurred.  Again, those are very rare.
Also: see the next bit about your semester grades....
 
Ok, that's final exam grades.  What about semester grades?
 
First, preliminary grades are computed in autolab, and they include the proper weightings as per the syllabus.  However, AMG grades are not entered yet.  We will do this probably by Monday.  Also, Prof Andersen and I need to carefully review each student on the "bubble" -- that is, students who are within a couple of tenths of a point to the next-higher grade.  We will consider your full body of work, and review your TP grading, to be sure you are getting the most fair and accurate grade possible.

Bottom line:  there is still some work to be done to get the gradebook into its end-of-semester form.  But it's close.  We'll post back here as there is more to share.
 
That's it for now.
 
Congrats again on a wonderful showing on your finals, and good luck on the rest of your finals.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Kinect returns
Hi all.  All the Kinects must be returned by Friday.  For those of you who have a borrowed Kinect that you need to return:
 
You can bring it to my office at these times:
   Wed, 3:30pm sharp (sorry for the narrow window)
   Thu, noon to 2pm (usual OH)
   Fri, 10:30 to noon
 
You can also bring it to my optional lecture, Friday noon to 3pm, in GHC 4211.
 
If none of these work, then you can (in order of preference):
 
* Bring it to Angie Luck's office (GHC 6006) during business hours (you can't leave it outside her door, but must give it to her directly)
 
* Bring it to a CA who can bring it to me.  This is by far the least desirable option, so please be creative and find another way to get it return.

Thanks!

David

Optional/advanced lecture is Friday, noon, GHC 4211
Hi all.  As per @4011, we'll have one last optional/advanced lecture.  There was no time that worked for everyone (sorry...), but the best time by far was Friday at noon, so we'll do that.  Friday, noon, GHC 4211.  We'll write our own very simple programming language.  Fun times!  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

About those post-midterm2 topics
Hi all.  Some people are expressing concern, trying desperately to memorize vast tracts of code from the post-midterm2 topics.
 
No need!!!!
 
They are on the final, as advertised, but -- also as advertised -- they will not be worth much, and we will not ask hard questions about them.  Basically, if you attended and paid attention, you are fine.  Really.
 
So don't panic (which is generally good advice).
 
And do get out and enjoy the absolutely lovely weather.  What a great day for a final!  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David

One more optional/advanced lecture (How to write a programming language)
Hi all.  Several of you are asking for it, so let's do it:  an optional/advanced lecture on how to write a programming language.  Ideally, it'd be Python or Python-like, but we may settle for something more Lisp-like (it covers nearly all of the same concepts, but is easier to do quickly).
 
Once we cover this, you'll have covered from a bucket of sand to circuits, then from circuits to CPU's and machine language, then from there to assembly language, then from there to Python, and of course from there to everything!  And so, you'll have completed the bucket-of-sand-to-Tetris course!!!  :-)
 
One issue: we are rapidly running out of semester.  There are only a few times left when I can even try to do this, and I understand these may conflict with other things you have to do (like, say, take finals, or leave for the summer, etc).  Sorry if this doesn't work out.  We'll do our best to find a time that works for as many of you who are interested as possible.
 
Here is the obviously-optional sign-up form, due today.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

tp3 and quiz9 grades posted
Hi all.  Your tp3 grades are now posted.  The median was a spectacular 90, so fully half of you scored A's on your term projects.  That's fabulous!
 
Now, a few words about tp grades...  We know that you poured enormous energy and effort into your term projects.  And we wish we could give everyone an A, even a high A.  But we cannot, and surely you understand that.  Also, given that everyone does a different project, the process is subjective.  It is very hard to compare apples and oranges.  But we have a thorough, and very fair, and very dependable process for this.  It culminated in a 4-hour meeting yesterday where the CA's and both professors all discussed a great many projects, being sure that the grades from one set of graders are consistent with those from another.  We are quite confident that the grades are fair and reasonable and consistent.  Even so, we understand the frustration that can come from getting a lower term project grade than you had hoped for.  In such cases, please talk to me about how you might do better on your future projects in future courses here at CMU (and beyond).
 
As for regrades, we generally do not do that for term projects.  The process is intensive and extensive, and it would not be fair to reconsider one student's grade without reconsidering everyone's, and we don't have the resources for that, nor is it necessary, given how much effort went into getting the grading right in the first place.
 
That said...  Sometimes errors do happen in grading.  It's very, very rare in tp grading, but in theory it could happen even there.  For example, maybe we somehow overlooked an entire huge part of your submission.  Hard to imagine, but possible.  In that case, you can bring it to Anqi (acong) and she'll have a look, promoting cases to Prof Andersen or to me as appropriate.
 
But please do not ask about cases where there was not an error or oversight, but rather where you are not happy with the decision.  We understand that, but we also are not going to change it.  The grades are fair, and deserved, and final.
 
One more thing: for the few of you who, after the final exam is factored in, wind up on a "bubble" at the semester, within a few decimal points of the next-higher grade, Prof Andersen and I will take a second (well, really, a third or fourth) look at your tp just to triple-check the grading, since in those (and only those) cases, a point or two difference could lead to a letter-grade difference at the semester.  Note that we will never lower tp grades in such cases, but we may increase them, but only by a point or two, and even then it is quite rare.  Also: you do not sign up for this.  We do it automatically for anyone on the bubble.
 
Also: quiz9 grades are now posted.  The median was a rock-solid 89, which of course is extremely high for a quiz.  Great job.
 
And so all grades are now in except for the final exam.  And heading into the final, the current overall median is over 86.  That's pretty crazy high for a course median.  Our Dean will want some answers on why this course is so soft.  Of course, it's not!  It's just that you are all doing such a great job, and have simply earned such high grades.  Really!
 
We have one more thing left to do, of course, and that's the final.  Best of luck on that!
 
Oh, and for your planning purposes:  we'll start grading the finals tomorrow, and then it takes a few days, plus we have to then grade the alternate final exams, which means we may not have the grades out before Friday at the earliest, and perhaps not until Monday.  We'll do our best to get them out as fast as possible.
 
Good luck tonight.
 
And... Carpe diem.
 
David


Lasting perma-link to course website
Hi again.  So you know:  http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112 is always a link to the current version of 15-112.  And soon, that will not be yours!
 
No worries.  I keep a permanent backup of the course website on my own server, and that then serves as a perma-link.  And so, here is the perma-link to the course website:
    http://www.kosbie.net/cmu/spring-15/15-112/
 
Carpe diem!
 
David
 
TP Gallery is live!
Hi all.  Our online TP Gallery is now live by the link on the course website (which points here).  And the projects, once again, are wonderful!  And clever, and creative, and fun, and...  Such a great job!!!!!
 
Kudos, everyone!!!  :-)
 
And good luck on the final tonight.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Final exam: Pre-Published Notes and Hints
Hi all.  Here are a few Pre-Published Notes and Hints that will also appear verbatim on the final exam tomorrow:
 
* There are 9 sections, 8 worth 10 points and 1 worth 20 points (section 9 is a double-weighted problem worth 20 points, because it is a bit longer and more complicated than the other Free Response questions). These include Short Answer, Code Tracing, Reasoning over Code, and then 6 Free Response sections (one of which is double-weighted). So the exam is fairly traditional, but with a slightly heavier weighting on Free Response.
 
* The two sections on which you score the lowest will be half-weighted. If you score the lowest on the double-weighted section, it alone will be half-weighted.
 
* Nearly all the topics after midterm2 will be on the final in some way. 
 
Good luck tomorrow!

David

Does piazza handle recursion?
The answer is in @3982.  :-)

Final exam logistics, policies, and suggestions (required reading)
 
Hi all. Here is important info for the final exam on Monday.  Please read all of this carefully today:
 
 
* Bring your physical photo andrew id card to the final!
Everyone must show a photo andrew id card to get into the room, and then again to submit your completed exam and leave the room.  With a class of so many students, not every proctor will know every student, and so we will visually verify every student's id.  No id, no final, no exceptions!

* Attend your assigned room!
Rooms are assigned according to andrew id's as such (this is also on the course website):
Room
Andrew Id's
GHC 4307
AAA** to AWW**
GHC 4401 (Rashid)
AYC** to KAK**
UC/McConomy
KAR** to ZSI**

Be sure to attend the correct room!  Of course, those of you who have pre-approved and pre-scheduled times with Larry Powell's office will also work directly with them on when and where to sit for your exam.

* Sit every other seat, in columns
When viewed from the front, there should be straight columns heading back.  So you would sit directly behind the person in front of you, with nobody within one seat on either side of you.

* Do not discuss the final with those who are yet to take it (of course)
A small group of students have university-approved conflicts and so will not take the exam until Thursday.  Please be sure to not talk to them about any aspect of the final exam until after they take the exam, too.
 
* No questions, except language clarifications and possible exam errors
This is the usual policy.  We are happy to explain any English terms if you do not understand them.  And you may bring actual errors in the exam to our attention (though these are quite rare, though again they do sometimes happen).  Otherwise, no questions.

* Scratch paper policy
Unlike on our quizzes or midterms, you may not use your own scratch paper on the final exam.   Aside from your own pen or pencil (that is not red!), you may only use materials that we provide to you.  Blank sheets of scratch paper will be available as you enter the exam room.  You may take one sheet if you wish.  If you do take a sheet of scratch paper that we provide, then you must place your name and andrew id clearly at the top, and submit it along with your final exam.  We will not look at it nor use it in any way when grading.  Even so, you must submit any scratch paper, even if it is blank.

* Bathroom policy
If you need to do so, raise your hand and stay seated until a proctor can escort you.  We have limited proctors, and so we can only escort one or two people at a time, so this may take a few minutes in some cases.
 
* Midway break
About halfway through the exam, we will stop the clock for one minute, when everyone is free to stand up and stretch in place.  No talking or otherwise communicating with neighbors, though.  This minute will not count towards the 180 minutes.

* Candy and such
The CS Department kindly provides candy to students taking CS finals.  You may augment this with your own snacks and drinks (in closed containers) if you wish.  Please be respectful of those around you and eat quietly, and please leave the room as you found it (without crumbs and wrappers).
 
* Arrive early!
We will start at 5:30pm sharp.  So please arrive a bit early.
 
And now a few things that are more suggestions than requirements...

* Keep comfortable
Studies confirm that if you are too cold or too hot your grade may suffer.  So wear light layers, and add or remove them as needed during the exam to stay just right!  And wear comfortable shoes.  It helps!  :-)

* Don't stress too much!
A little stress is usually a good thing, keeping you energized and focused.  Too much stress is definitely a bad thing, for obvious reasons.  So do the things you need to do, use the tricks you've learned that work for you, to keep your stress levels down.  You are fine.  You'll do fine.  Just stay focused and do your best.

* Keep moving!
The exam is not a race -- you have over 2x the time as for a midterm, but the exam is perhaps just over 1.5x the midterms in size, so you should have plenty of time.  Even so, you should pace yourself.  Don't recklessly race forward, but do keep moving ahead, and not getting stuck for too long on one problem.  Do what you can first, then double back to the problems that you need more time for.
 
* Check your work!
If you are done early, maybe take a short break for a minute or two to clear your head, but then... Check and re-check all your answers.  In particular, be sure that you actually answered every question on the exam!  And check that you satisfied all the conditions in the free response problems.

* Do the bonus (if you are done early)
Bonus problems are hard by design, but they are also at least somewhat doable.  Do not even think about bonus until you are done, and have checked and re-checked your answers.  But if you still have time, take a gander at the bonus.  It's just free points, after all!
 
* Get plenty of sleep!
Tonight and tomorrow night are when you should get your 8+ hours of sound sleep!  Do not short your sleep!  We have an evening exam, so you are more likely to be tired than in an afternoon exam.  So be sure to get your sleep!!!
 
* Keep a positive attitude
Studies confirm the obvious: you will do better if you are in a better frame of mind.  So smile, relax, keep your chin up, and just do your best, and you'll be fine!
 
Carpe diem!  And good luck!

David

More on late and missed grading meetings
Hi all.  Happily, most of you are attending your tp grading sessions, showing up on time, and everything is going ahead like clockwork.  Woohoo.
 
This post is for the others of you, those who were late or entirely missed their grading meetings.
 
Following on @3966, to be clear, here are the deductions involved for such cases:
 
1. Deductions for those who are late or miss meetings, but eventually have a meeting by the Sunday night deadline:
1a) Late to a grading meeting:
-0.5 pt per minute up to -2.5 max.
1b) Missed grading meeting but made up by Sunday night:
-2.5 pts
2) Deductions for those who don't make it by Sunday night:
2a) -10 pts if you meet by Monday 11:59pm
2b) -20 pts if you meet by Tuesday 11:59pm
2c) -50 pts if you meet by Wednesday 11:59pm
2d) -100 pts otherwise

We really do not want anyone to get any more deductions for this, so let's all please be sure to get those grading meetings in asap, and please be on time to them.

Thanks!!!
 
David

Autolab temporary weirdness with tp grade computations (until Monday)
Hi all.  With tp3 being in the tp category, Autolab is currently giving everyone a 0 for their term project grade.  Ugh!  Rest assured that this is a temporary Autolab thing, and nobody is getting a 0 on their tp.
 
We'll get the tp grades in by Monday morning, and release them then, and then your grade computations will be normal and complete (except for the final, of course).

Sorry for the confusion.

David

TP Gallery Sign-Up And Summary Video Release Form
Hi all.  Please use this optional form to sign up for the TP Gallery and also the Summary Video.  Today is a fine day to do that!!!  :-)
 
We do not require anyone to be in the TP Gallery, but we strongly encourage everyone to do so.  The gallery is not exclusive.  Everyone is invited to participate.  We hope to have a wide variety of project types, and project grades.  Think about how the gallery helped you and your classmates.  You now have a chance to be part of the gallery to help future 112 students.  Plus, employers sometimes spot prospects in the gallery!  It's not like that happens every day, but it definitely does happen sometimes!
 
In addition to the TP Gallery, we will be making a "Summary Video", which will basically be like the Lightning Round video, only for public consumption.  We hope that nearly all of you give us permission to use short snippets of your videos (which we will edit out, as we did for the TP Showcase) in that context, and we hope to include as many of your video snippets as possible.
 
Again, here is  the optional form to sign up for the TP Gallery and also the Summary Video.  And again, today is a fine day to do that!!!  :-)
 
Many thanks, and congrats again on your wonderful term projects!  And good luck on your upcoming finals!

Carpe diem.

David

Attend grading meetings, don't be late, and be certain to make up missed meetings today!
Hi all.  Some of you have missed your meetings.  It is urgently required that you make them up today.  As the writeup says:  "Also, if you do not sign up for in-person grading, or you miss your reservation, then you must reschedule prior to Sunday night, at a time that is convenient for your Mentor, or you will receive 0/100 for your term project grade!"
 
The writeup does not say the penalty for being late or for missing and rescheduling, but there naturally will be a reasonable point deduction in each case.
 
So: be on time.  Of course!  And if you did miss, reschedule asap.  We don't want to give any 0's.  We want to give you the grades you worked hard to earn.
 
So:  sign up for grading sessions and then attend them, and attend them on time.
 
Of course!
 
Good luck with them.
 
David

My OH next week (Tue -> Mon)
Hi all.  Please note that my Tue OH is moved to Monday, still noon to 2pm-or-done.  And I will also have Thursday OH as normal next week, noon to 2pm-or-done.  Those are my last official OH of the semester.
 
See some of you there!
 
David

Jordan wins the 2015 Mark J Stehlik Introductory and Service Teaching Award!!!
Hi all.  Please join me in congratulating our Head CA, Jordan Zink, who has won the 2015 Mark J Stehlik Introductory and Service Teaching Award (see below).  I cannot imagine a more deserving candidate.

Congratulations, Jordan!!!!!
 
David

FCE's and additional course feedback
Hi again.  In addition to your very helpful CA feedback, now is when we seek your FCE's and additional course feedback.  We'll send email reminders to you from the FCE system (which does it semi-automatically).  To be clear:  Your input is invaluable, and we take everything you say to heart.  Each semester, based largely on student feedback, we make some changes to the course, in the hopes of improving the student experience.  Your input is the key to that process.  So please help us make this course better for future 112 students!
 
There are several ways to do this:  first, please do fill out an FCE form.  We welcome all your comments, and again, we will take them to heart.
 
Second, please stop by my office or Professor Andersen's, and we can chat about your experiences and your ideas for how we might improve the course.
 
Third, if you don't have time to chat, or if you prefer to give longer comments, or if you prefer some anonymity (which is fine), then you can print your comments on paper and slide them under our door.  This is not in replacement of FCE's, but in addition, for longer comments that wouldn't fit on that form.
 
The bottom line:  we want your feedback.  Please let us know how it went for you, what worked well and should be kept, and what could have gone better and should be tweaked in some way.  You can be sure we'll think long and hard about what you say, and many of you will have a direct and immediate positive impact on how the course operates in the upcoming fall semester.
 
Thanks again.  And...
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Departmental CA Feedback form
Hi all.  First, once again, congrats on such wonderful tp's.  Fabulous!
 
Now, as for this post:  in addition to your mid-semester CA feedback, which we gather ourselves, the CS Department has its own end-of-semester form which they use.  Please see the email below (or just go right to this link) and please do take a minute or two to fill out the form and give your CA's a bit more constructive feedback.  This is very helpful for them and for the department, so thank you!!!!  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

TP Showcase Invitations Sent / See you all soon!
Hi all.  We just completed the near-impossible task of selecting only a dozen or so projects for tonight's presentations.  Invitations have been sent.  For those who did not receive an invitation, you should know, once again, that there were so many wonderful projects that we could not include.  So:  great job!!!!!!
 
Now, let's all meet at 8pm and have fun and revel in your collective great works!!!!
 
Kudos again, and see you all soon!!!

David

And... wow!
Hi again.  I've only started to look through the 200+ submissions we already have, and my goodness, there are so many wonderful projects.  You all have moved mountains here, and the results are just spectacular.
 
Starting at 4:30pm sharp, we'll do our best to select the program for tonight's TP showcase, but it's already very clear that there are many dozens of fine projects that should be showcased but will not, as there's only so much time for tonight's event.
 
It's a nice problem to have, really, and a testament to your collective effort and results.  Kudos!!!!
 
Look to your email by 7pm on the outside, maybe a bit earlier, for announcements about the TP showcase.
 
And for those who've not yet submitted, please wrap it up and submit now!!!
 
Great job, everyone!!!!!!
 
And...  Carpe diem!!!
 
David


Time to submit!
Hi all.  The time is upon us, the hard deadline is less than 30 minutes from now.
 
And while most of you have submitted, just over 110 still have not.
 
If you are in that latter group, please stop what you are doing and submit now!  Then you can go back and try to finish what you are doing and submit again (you get 2 submissions).  But you really need to be sure you get a submission in before 4:30pm.
 
Good luck!!!!

David

Tomorrow's plans (including TP Showcase)
 
And hi once more.  We are a day away now.  Amazing how time flies at this part of the semester!  As you wrap up your projects, here are the plans for tomorrow.
 
The day has two parts:  finishing and submitting the projects, and then the TP Showcase.  The TP Showcase is in McConomy tomorrow (Thursday) night, starting at 8pm sharp (please show up early, we will start promptly at 8pm), and running for maybe a little over an hour (we'll be done by 9:30pm for sure, maybe earlier).
 
As for the showcase, as noted, it is a required event but it's also a lot of fun.  It's not so much a competition as a chance for us all to share in some of the great projects that you have collectively produced.  There is an educational objective, to help you think about the rich variety of things you can now do with your hard-won programming prowess.  But it's also just about having some fun!  There is also a friendly competition, with prizes going to the winning projects.  And many thanks to our kind friends and supporters at APT (http://www.predictivetechnologies.com/) for sponsoring this event and for providing the prizes!
 
Now, we wish that all of you could present tomorrow night.  But time only permits that maybe 15 or so can present (out of 350+ projects).  So now we have the nearly impossible task of choosing those 15 projects.  What's more, we have very little time to do that (we start the process at 4:30pm sharp tomorrow!).  Given these constraints, we'll do our level best, but it is quite possible that one or two of the very best projects do not get included (sorry), and it is also simply guaranteed that dozens of superb projects simply cannot be included due to time constraints (ditto).  Even so, we'll do our best to pick a bunch of fun and compelling projects for the event.
 
Presenters will be notified via email no later than 7pm tomorrow (so please check your email promptly then!).  Presenters meet at McConomy at 7:30pm to make sure that AV works and to cover any other pre-event logistics.  Note that presenters may do a live demo of their project, or may elect to use portions of their video (which avoids demo gremlins, and also may simplify AV issues).  It's really your choice.  Also, note that the McConomy AV uses only VGA with lower resolution, and not HDMI (bummer), so please plan accordingly.  Anyhow, more details will be provided in the email tomorrow evening.
 
As for the main event, everyone should show up at McConomy a bit early, say starting at 7:50pm, so we can get the fun started at 8pm.  :-)

Also, please be sure to bring a piece of paper and a writing implement with you to the event.  Thanks!
 
With that said, here is the schedule for tomorrow:
 
10:30am + 3pm:  Lecture (Optional last-minute OH)
We'll have some CA's on hand to help, not so much with debugging (you should not be writing any code tomorrow!), but more with video production, or uploading, or creating zip files, etc -- the final steps in packaging and submitting your project.  That said, of course we'll try to help as best we can with whatever issues you may have.
 
4:30pm:  tp deadline
Please be certain to submit by this deadline!  Again, all submissions must be via autolab (not email), and no late submissions will be accepted.
 
7:00pm: Presentation invitations will be emailed

7:30pm: Presenters meet at McConomy
 
8:00pm: TP Showcase in McConomy
 
Best of luck wrapping things up!

Carpe diem!
 
David

Use demo shortcuts
 
Hi again.  Here's some helpful advice:  add demo shortcuts (or "cheats") to your project.  In your video, or your grading session, or when demoing in a job interview, you may want to demo some features that take a while to set up.  Rather than use precious time trying to create the conditions you need for that, instead just say press "1" to go to "cool demo scene 1", and "2" for "cool demo scene 2", and so on.  Then you hardcode all the conditions you need to demo that feature.  See?
 
Also, as noted, "cheats" can be helpful for demoing.  Say, adding immortality or moving through walls or being able to simply enter the current level, etc.
 
And pre-built examples also are very helpful.  If your program lets you draw pictures, instead of demoing some simple tiny picture, why not draw and save some fabulous picture, which you then can load right at the start of your demo?
 
Anyhow, the basic idea is that you own the code, so you can write that code specifically with an eye towards supporting your ability to demo the code well.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Video hints
Hi all.  Here are some hints for your videos:
 
* Keep them short
 
* Keep them interesting and engaging
 
* Do not cover everything, just cover the highlights
 
* Remember your audience (job interviewer first, grader second, rest of the world third)
 
* Be sure an informed viewer (say, a grader, or -- more important -- a job interviewer) could understand what you are saying, what you are showing, and why it matters.
 
* Be sure the screen is readable.
 
* Be sure your audio is hearable.  Speak clearly.
 
* Be enthusiastic.
 
* Watch and listen to your video before posting.  Be sure it passes muster.
 
* Post-processing (background audio, splash screen, etc) is not required, but is pretty easy to do, and does make for a nicer experience if done even adequately well.
 
* If part of your project runs too long, you can omit parts.  So a 30-second video analysis tool might be reduced to 1-second.  Just be sure to clearly say that you did this, and it's fine (really).
 
* Uploading to YouTube (or wherever) can take a LONG time.  Start early.  Today, ideally.
 
* Do not wait to the last minute to do your video.
Your video does not have to include all your final edits and bug fixes.  So you can cut your video today.  Now, even.  And that's a fine idea.
 
Good luck, and have fun with it!

David

Zork bonus project also counts for Huffmann (re: @3929)
Hi again.  If you did the Zork bonus project, you can also fill out the Huffmann bonus form.  :-)
 
David

Huffmann bonus followon
Hi all.  This is for those of you who attended the optional/advanced lecture earlier this semester on Huffmann coding, and then submitted the bonus project to me.  If (and only if) that describes you, then please fill out this form today.  Thanks.  :-)
 
Meanwhile, for everyone:  good luck wrapping up your tp's!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Attendance today
Hi all.  Something quirky happened with attendance during Lecture 1 this morning.  We wound up with 192 people on our form, but only 160 or so in the room.  Weird.  So, we threw out that form and did it again, the second time the numbers matched.  Whew.
 
If you were in the room for the first but not the second form, then you do not count as having attended today.
 
You could attend Lecture 2, which starts in 11 minutes (at 3pm).
 
Or, if you were there for part of this morning and then had to leave for some documentable university-approved absence (as happened in at least one case), then email me to let me know.  Thanks.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Important notes for tp3 handin
Hi all.  Please read these important notes regarding tp3 handin:

* Submit no later than Thu at 4:30pm
It is due at 4:30pm sharp.  No extensions (not even for computer crashes, typhoons, werewolves, space aliens, etc, not even a few minutes), no grace days, no late days.  Be absolutely certain to submit by 4:30pm sharp.  Earlier is better.

* Submit an actual zip file
Some of you submitted other formats for tp1 and tp2.  Do not do that for tp3.  If you are at all unsure of how to make a zip file, ask a CA for help.  Otherwise, you'll get a submission format error with a corresponding small deduction, as we will have to fix your submission for you if we can.

* Submit up to twice max
There it is: there is a 2-submission max.  There is no autograder (of course), so you should only need one, but you have two.  That requires nearly 15GB of storage on our server, which is partly why the cap is at two.  But two it is, so plan accordingly.

* Submit no more than 20MB
Submissions are capped at 20MB, and we'd prefer much smaller.  If your submission must be larger, follow the instructions in the writeup carefully.  Make a copy of your submission, and in that copy delete media (images, video, etc) as necessary to make it fit under 20MB, then submit that, in addition to a link to Dropbox or somewhere else that contains your full submission.  No matter what, be sure that by the 4:30pm deadline we have all your code in your autolab submission, along with whatever else fits, and a link as necessary to the rest.

* Use liberal citations
We are dealing with the third major citation issue now.  That means over 99% of you are doing it right (whew!).  But still, let's get everyone from here on out to please use liberal citations.  If you use it, cite it.  And be sure we clearly understand what is originally yours and what is not.

* Have fun!
Really.  You'll be done with your term project in a couple of days whether or not you have some fun with it.  But it will be more enjoyable if you do have some fun.  So, do it!  Don't stress.  Just give it the best you've got, all things considered (including sleep, other courses, etc), and have fun with it.

Good luck!  And...  Carpe diem.

David

Tomorrow's lecture (user-study-a-thon)
Hi all.  Tomorrow is a required class, with attendance counting towards quiz9.  It's not an ordinary lecture, but rather a "user-study-a-thon".  The whole point is to help make your term projects better.
 
Everyone should bring whatever you need to run your tp.  If your tp is not entirely runnable, that's ok, run what you can.  If your tp cannot be run in class (say, you are controlling a robot that you cannot bring to class), then you can cut a short (low-production-value) video of your tp in use.
 
The format is simple:  you will form small groups, and you will demo your projects to each other.  Then you'll give really helpful, productive, constructive, clever, useful feedback to each other.  And you'll take copious notes on the feedback you get, and include that feedback in your tp writeup.  You also should take the feedback into account, and amend your design in some way (yes, even at this late date) to improve it based on the feedback.
 
This is a hyper-compressed version of "iterative design".  In a perfect world, you'd have lots of time to internalize the feedback you get, make thoughtful design changes, build and test them, and then have another round of user studies.  And you'd iterate this way until you converged on a strong design that tests really well.  That's the basic idea.  Here, we just don't have the time for that, so we do what we can.  And that is tomorrow's user-study-a-thon.
 
Good luck wrapping up your tp's, and see you tomorrow.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Convergence
Hi all.  I hope you had a really nice weekend, and enjoyed some of that spring sunshine, and also made stupendous progress on your tp's!  :-)
 
In any case, we are now in the last few days, and now is the time to start converging.  Focus on reaching a completely-working project.  If a feature is not working, at some point soon (maybe right now) you'll have to simply drop the feature.  It happens a lot in industry, it's not a failure, it's just how software development goes.  Not every feature makes it into the shipping product.  And it's always better to have something small and working rather than something large and broken.  Or, in a more realistic tradeoff for many of you:  something small and lovely is far preferable to something large and unpolished.
 
Also: you should converge on completely-working versions of your project, and save those, and move from one to the next.  That way, if something is unworking, you can roll back at any time to a previous version that is submittable.  This is a safe way to proceed at this point.
 
And: don't stress.  It won't help.  Just do your best, and that will have to be good enough.  And it will be good enough, too.
 
From what I've seen so far, you are collectively doing a great job, and we will be seeing a great many fabulous projects this semester.
 
So converge, don't stress, and have fun.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Steganography bonus (fun, optional, solo, due Friday 11:59pm)
Hi all.  If you are looking for a fun little diversion from your tp's (which I hope are going super well), here you go.
 
This is optional bonus, to be done entirely solo, for +5 points on quiz9.  It is due Friday at 11:59pm.
 
Here is an encoded image:
 

 
The encoder was altered slightly from the usual encoder.  You need to alter the decoder in the same way to get the decoded message.  You can probably find it by trial-and-error, but you might also be able to figure it out by carefully inspecting the low-order bits of the encoded message.
 
To submit your answer, use this form, again by 11:59pm on Friday.
 
You can do this non-solo, but then not for bonus points, just for fun.
 
Have fun!!!
 
David
 
Please be careful with your citations!
Hi all.   There have been numerous smaller blown citations so far resulting in point deductions, and now we are dealing with our second larger case (where students explore and perhaps cross the line between blown citations and outright cheating; ugh).
 
Don't let this be you.  And it is very simple to avoid this.  Just cite your sources.  Liberally.  Comprehensively.  Carefully.  And clearly.  That's it.
 
Please be careful with your citations!
 
David

Extra CA-led session, tomorrow (Sunday), 9am
Hi all.  For anyone who may have missed the CA-led lectures this week, there is one last chance to get the quiz9 credit.  Alex has kindly offered to lead one more lecture (thanks, Alex!) on a topic TBD, starting at 9am tomorrow (Sunday).
 
If you are interested, please email Alex (aoneill@andrew.cmu.edu).  Naturally, the talk will only occur if there is interest.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

The reduced role of OH and piazza during tp season
Hi again.  One more thing:  most of you are doing great (woohoo!), and understand the reduced role of OH and piazza during TP season.  Some others, though, have expressed some concerns or frustrations about this, hence this post.  I hope to clarify the what and why of the policy.
 
First, the policy:  during the tp part of the course (now!), we provide lighter support both during OH and on piazza.

This is by design, and for two reasons.  First, pedagogically, it's simply in your best interests for you to write your own project, with minimal supports from us.  That is the exit criterion for the course, and it's the goal all of you presumably have, too.  After this course, you want to be able to see a problem, dream up a solution, then build, test, and deploy it, and ultimately to solve the problem.  On your own.  Without OH and without piazza.  And so your tp has to be that way, too (well, mostly).  So reduced OH and reduced piazza is very much in your best interests.

Second, though, it's also simply a matter of logistics.  Our CA's are investing their time providing mentoring support and grading for up to 9 mentees, as well as covering all their other many CA duties.  This basically completely fills all their time, leaving almost no time for OH and piazza.  This is ok, in fact even desirable, given the previous point.

And so, both to help you achieve self-reliance, and to focus our precious CA resources where they will have the largest impact, we reduce OH and piazza at this time of the semester.

Historically, this approach has led to wonderful term projects built by wonderfully self-reliant students.  This feels like a fine outcome, and one we are rapidly converging on yet again this semester.

This is not to diminish our concerns for anyone experiencing frustration.  Term projects can be frustrating at times.  And we are happy to talk about how you can manage that frustration.  In fact, that is precisely the job of your mentor, as well as the CA's at OH, and Prof Andersen and me.  So talk to us.  But we'll talk about strategies and tactics, about ways to manage the stress and frustration, and ways to practically move forward.  The actual work, though, will be yours to do.  That is how it should be.  And...  You can do it!!!

I hope this clarifies the matter.  And I hope you are enjoying your project and starting to see it shape up into something you can be proud of.

Good luck with it!!!

David 

Reminders, suggestions, and what-nots (please read)
 
Hi all.  Here are some reminders, suggestions, and what-nots:
 
* tp2 due today at 8pm
As with tp1, the deadline is firm, so please be sure to submit whatever you have on time by 8pm tonight.
 
* Backup, backup, backup
Be sure to back up all your tp files at least once every day, even more often is better.  We?ve already had cases of students losing work due to hardware failure.  That is predictable.  Your only defense is to backup your code religiously.  Backup, backup, backup?.
 
* Watch "Ex Machina" tomorrow night!
Check this out:  CMU Gets Early Screening of "Ex Machina".  Optional, of course.  :-)
 
* tp3 is due in 8 days
Tp3 is the final tp submission.  You should plan to be basically done a few days early (by Monday) if possible, leaving time for polishing, making your video, and doing last-minute odds and ends.  Those wrapping-up things take surprisingly long.  Don?t leave them for the last few hours.  Things go wrong in the last few hours.  Thursday afternoon of next week, you?ll feel so much better if your tp3 is already entirely finished and submitted, and instead of panicking with a deadline racing at you, you are already experiencing some well-earned post-term-project-induced euphoria (or catatonia, as the case may be).  Nice?
 
* MVP (Minimum Viable Product)
As we pass the tp2 deadline, we enter the homestretch.  It?s important that you focus on the so-called MVP, or Minimum Viable Product.  Work with your mentor to decide the absolute minimum you need to pass, and focus on getting that much working first.  This may involve stopping work on a feature you love ? the one that really makes your project pop, the one that led you to do your project in the first place ? and instead for now focus on more menial tasks, like UI layout and other basic project mechanics.  Because:  no matter how awesome some features are, and no matter how many thousands of lines of code or hundreds of hours of effort you invest, if you don?t have a basic working project, you cannot score above 79 (this is true in industry ? no matter how great some features are, if you don?t have a fundamentally usable product, you can?t sell it).  And so, for now, if your project can run without it, skip it, whatever it is.  Get that MVP working, get your B-level project in the bank, and then set your sights on all the great, awesome, exciting features you can dream up!

* How to manage serious roadblocks
Many (perhaps all) of you are running into minor bumps with your projects.  That is expected.  Even some major bumps are routine.  But...  Some others are running into full-fledged roadblocks and are basically stuck, unable to make any real progress.  That is different, and you have to get past that, and right away.  At this stage of the project, if you can't do something, after some serious effort, then simply don't!  Engineer your way around it.  Find some other way to do something similar, but maybe less elegantly, or slower, or less generally.  Or find a package that does it for you.  Or simply drop the feature entirely.  No matter how important that feature seems, if it isn't working and practically speaking isn't going to be working, then it's a liability and you need to make the hard decision to move on without it.
 
* you can still change projects (though only with mentor permission)
Yes, it is quite late in the game, but... It is still possible, starting today, to write a complete, passing term project by the deadline.  And so, if your project really has no traction, and you don't see a way to get it working on time, or you just really don't like the project any more, then:  meet with your mentor, today, and start a new project.  Really.  The new one should be straightforward, using no modules except Tkinter, and something that you are confident you can do and that sounds interesting to you.  You can do it!  You can!  Once again, though, you may only do this after discussing it with your mentor and with explicit mentor permission.
 
* Some of you should start over
To be clear:  the preceding option is not just academic.  It is the right course of action for some of you, to be sure.
 
* Mosaic was born today
The first browser was born 22 years ago today (in 1993). As noted here: "The National Center for Supercomputing Applications releases version 1.0 (RTM) of the Mosaic Web Browser. It was the first browser with a Graphical user interface for content. Marc Andreesen and Jim Clark were the lead developers. The browser would take the internet by storm and continue to lead until 1998 when IE and Netscape came on the scene."
 
* And...  Where is Mosaic now?
Well, Mosaic is long gone (though you can still download it from here!!!), but most of the Mosaic team left to build Netscape Navigator, and while that is also long gone now it served as the starting point for... Mozilla Firefox!!!!  Cool.

* Have fun!
Truly.  Don?t get stressed.  We are in the homestretch, but rather than stressing you out, it should liberate you.  You don?t have time to worry, so don?t.  Just focus on what you can control, take one step at a time, get the basics working and then grow your project from there.  And have fun!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
 
Microsoft WebApp Workshop: Tomorrow, 6:30-10pm
Hi all.  Check out this entirely optional (in fact, non-15-112) event:
CMU_WebApp_Workshop_420.pdf
 
This looks like a great opportunity to get a guided tour by Microsoft engineers on creating web apps.  And to get some free food.  :-)
 
Enjoy!
 
David

Be sure to cite any help from tutors!
Hi all.  This is a reminder of @3695:
 
Q: Can I hire a tutor to help me with my term project?
A: Yes and no.  You can have a tutor help you so long as you very clearly cite the code that they help you produce.  That code will not count as your original code, so you will not get credit for it, but you certainly may use it, just as you'd use any other code or module from anyone else.  Just be sure to cite it properly.
 
Be sure to adhere to this, if you do have a tutor helping you in any way with your term project.
 
David

Happy Carnival!!!
Hi all.  May you all enjoy a wonderful Carnival weekend.
 
If you aren't planning to participate, I urge you to reconsider.  CMU academics are awesome (they are!), but there's much more to CMU than just our great academics.  Carnival is one of those special CMU experiences you simply should not miss.  And even if you plan to work hard this weekend, there's plenty of time to also get out there, experience Carnival, be part of it, and have some fun!
 
On the other hand: this is not a weekend to binge to excess.  That may be the norm at some colleges, but it surely is not the CMU way.  Seriously.  Have fun, have lots of fun (you sure deserve it!!!), but please keep things in balance.  Have healthy fun.  You know what I mean.
 
Be safe and enjoy!!!
 
Carpe diem.

David

My OH for today (canceled)
Hi all.  Please note that my OH today are canceled.  The rest of the OH schedule is unchanged over Carnival.
 
David

No grace days or late days for TP deadlines
Hi again.  This was made fairly clear already, but since someone just asked, let's make it perfectly clear:  grace days and late days only apply to hw's, not to term project submissions.  There are no grace days or late days for TP deadlines.  They are due at the given date and time, with no late submissions accepted.  Extensions are not granted, either, except in extreme cases.  Expected travel for athletic events, academic events, or job interviews would not qualify, nor would Carnival-related activities (to be clear, we very much encourage you to participate in Carnival, for sure, only you have to balance that with continuing in all your academic endeavors, including your term projects).
 
In any case, please be certain to submit whatever you have by each deadline.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David


Reminder: tp1 due at 8pm today, no late submissions accepted
Hi all.  Please be sure to submit whatever you have by 8pm today.  We will not accept late submissions for any tp deliverable (tp1, tp2, or tp3).
 
Here again is the tp1 deliverable spec:
 
Deliverable #1 [grade folded into a quiz grade]
Due Wed 15-Apr at 8pm 

Optional (though strongly recommended) Deliverable Previews
This deliverable includes several items that are technical and complicated, including your proposal, competitive analysis, storyboard, etc. To increase the chances that you are meeting the expected standards for this project, you are strongly encouraged to review these deliverables with your mentor prior to the deadline, perhaps even several times. In particular, you will want to submit multiple drafts of your project proposal to your mentor well ahead of the deadline, and then have numerous discussions on the feasibility and suitability of your proposal during this phase of the project. 

Project zip file
Place all the following in a single zip file which you will submit to Autolab. Again, be sure it is under 10 megabytes, omitting or truncating media as required to do so. 

Project Proposal
Include a complete and thorough project proposal, clearly defining the problem you intend to solve and a fairly detailed description of how you intend to solve it. In particular, your proposal must list all modules/technologies you plan to use outside of Tkinter. 

Technology Demonstrations
For each module/technology you listed in your proposal, you must include a demonstration of your suitable competency with that technology. This demonstration will be done in person at your meeting, but you also need to include in your submission the code artifacts and any other materials required in this regard. Note: anyone who cannot demonstrate mastery of their required technologies by this date will have to modify their term project to no longer use those technologies. Your mentor will determine what "suitable competency" means, but it is not enough to merely run a demo that you downloaded and did not modify in some meaningful way. 

Competitive Analysis
This is a written document summarizing your competitive analysis, where you scour the web and find several existing products that are similar to what you propose. You need to use those products and carefully think about them, then list a few features in those products that are especially compelling, that you plan to include in your program. Also, list some anti-features, which are features you do not like in those products and plan to change in your program. Do not just exhaustively list all the features of those apps, since they will have tons of features that are not really relevant to your program. Stick to those few features that are directly relevant to what you are building. This is not a short piece of work. Doing a competitive analysis well will take several hours at least. 

Storyboard
Here you should include hand-drawn pictures (do not worry about making them pretty) showing how your app will work from the user's perspective. Using your storyboard, you will walk your mentor through the user experience of your program, and you will do this prior to writing lots of code. This way, your mentor can help you make any necessary adjustments to your design prior to your having a huge investment in a large code base. 

Code Artifacts
You must have some code artifacts showing some early work, perhaps not working demos, perhaps some compelling demonstrations of various technologies (not just the default demos that most modules provide, but your own original code, even if based on those demos). In addition, you need to have some code that clearly is attempting to solve some of the core problems you are addressing. This does not require a working demo, but it does require that you must show some very clear progress in that direction. This is at the discretion of your mentor, but for most students, 200-400 lines of decent code would be a minimum amount at this point. 

A timesheet
In your top-level project directory, include a file named "timesheet.txt". In this file, keep track of the time you spend on the project. There is no specific time requirement, and more time will not necessarily equate to a higher grade. Again, though, it is expected that you should invest at least 10 hours per week and 30 total hours to obtain a satisfactory grade. 
 
Good luck!
 
David

15-112 Alternate Final Exam
Hi all.  This is only for those students who have a university-approved conflict with the university-scheduled 15-112 final exam (and who are not proctored by Larry Powell's office).  That conflict would be another final exam scheduled at the same time, or 2 other final exams both scheduled within 25 hours of the 15-112 exam.
 
If you are in that situation, then you may qualify to sit for the 15-112 Alternate Final Exam, which will be on Thursday May-7 1pm-4pm.

Note that nobody will be allowed to take the alternate exam without first obtaining explicit permission from me via email (spoken permission does not count) (and at this point, nobody has such an email).  Even if you have already talked to me or emailed me about your conflict, you need to email again asking for explicit permission to take the alternate final exam.
 
When you get my email with explicit permission, you must bring a physical printout of that email to the alternate final exam or you will not be allowed to take it!  There are no walk-ins allowed at the alternate final exam under any circumstances.
 
Please let me know if you have any questions or concerns about this, and please email me soon if you wish to obtain permission to sit for the alternate final exam.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Bring your laptops to class today!
Hi all.  Today's lecture will be in the post-midterm2 lecture+lab format.  There'll be some lecture, then you get to work in the lecture hall on a small lab problem, either individually or in very-small-groups (say, of 2 students).  Then, after a while, we'll present a solution to you.  This is sort of like an entire week's "flow" of the course packaged in a single 80-minute lecture.
 
Note that lecture+labs are required, with attendance counting towards quiz9, and that the material from these lecture+labs is fair game for the final exam (though not to the same depth as the core material, so if you attend and pay attention you'll be fine).
 
The lecture+labs also cover fun topics.  Today should be good fun.
 
Enjoy!!!
 
David

tp1 grades for procrastinators
Hi all.  It's great to see many of you making great progress on your term projects.  Kudos!
 
However, this is for the other 100 or so of you who have basically not yet started.  Basically, this is just a heads-up to expect nearly 0 points on tp1, even if you try to cover up your procrastination with some last-minute something or other.  It's not something you can just pull together in the last couple of hours.  If your mentor does not see obvious signs of large amounts of productive work, you will score very little, perhaps near 0, on tp1.
 
This is both to be fair to the 200+ of you who have invested those hours, and also to help motivate the rest of you to get going.
 
Procrastinating on a term project is a very bad idea.  You cannot do a decent term project in a few days, and you should not leave it to the end.  One byproduct of that is that you will fail tp1 and tp2, perhaps with near-0 points on each.  But the larger issue is that you'll undermine your chance at doing a decent project, and you'll perhaps fail the entire course.
 
So, for those of you who have not yet really started:  stop procrastinating!  Get going on your term projects today.
 
Or, accept the possibility of failing the course.  We sure don't want that, and you presumably don't, either.  So let's go back to the previous plan, and:  stop procrastinating.
 
Good luck, and carpe diem.
 
David

Offline tomorrow (and my Tue OH are moved to Wed)
Hi all.  Please note that I will be entirely offline for all of tomorrow.  Please contact Prof Andersen (dga@cs.cmu.edu) or Jordan (jzink@andrew.cmu.edu) with any pressing issues.  I'll be back online Wednesday 5:30am.
 
Also, my OH for tomorrow are moved to Wednesday, still noon to 2pm.
 
Thanks.

David


Respond promptly to your mentors' emails, and attend meetings (and on time, too)
Hi all.  Your mentors are working very hard for you, to keep you on track and to give you your best chance for an enjoyable and effective term project experience, and then with a successful outcome which you can be proud of.
 
They are also working with around 8 other students, not to mention still doing OH, piazza, and other duties, and being CMU students themselves, too.  They are happy to help you, to be sure, but they are also very, very busy.
 
So: please be sure to show common courtesy to them, which includes:
 
* Please be sure to respond promptly to their emails (basically, just respond right away each time you get an email from them).  Even if your response is just to tell them you have not made any progress, you need to send that to them.  If you don't respond to their emails, you'll have to meet with Prof Andersen and/or with me, and discuss why that is happening, and how it should lower your grade.  Which will be: a lot.  So don't do that.  Just do the right thing, not to mention the thing that helps your grade the most, which happily is also the non-anti-social thing, and respond quickly and respectfully to their emails.
 
* Also: please be sure to attend any scheduled meetings with them, and to be on time.
 
Thanks, and, again, good luck!
 
David

Full disclosure: the TP anti-plagiarism process (do not cheat!!!)
Hi all.  We know nearly all of you write your own TP's, investing huge effort and, happily, producing wonderful projects and reaping your significant and deserved rewards (better grades, nicer jobs, etc).
 
However, we also know that historically about 0.3% of you may make some very poor decisions in this regard.
 
So for the 99.7% of you, sorry for this distraction.  But everyone must read on, to be sure the 0.3% of you are also reading:
 
We do a much more extensive anti-plagiarism pass on your final term project submission than on anything else you submit all semester, including accessing local and online databases, doing Google searches, etc, etc.  For any project that is questionable, Prof Andersen and I may call you in to carefully explain to us your entire code base that you submit.  If you falter, you will fail the course and face significant additional penalties.  This is of no concern for anyone following the rules, since when you write code yourself, you know it in a deep and abiding way that only comes from genuine authorship, in a way that we can easily confirm.  It is easy to spot a fake.
 
Also, we maintain a database of all 5,000-or-so previous term project submissions since we started including them in this course years ago, and we compare each submission against these as well.  And there is no statute of limitations on cheating, which is to say that any previous student who is involved in a current cheating case can retroactively fail the course, and even retroactively un-graduate from CMU.  Ugh.
 
So:  please do not cheat!
 
We are very hopeful that we get a 0.0% TP cheating rate this semester.  Now that would be lovely!
 
In any case, it is absolutely, unquestionably better in every case for you to take a somewhat lower grade that you earned rather than to cheat and submit someone else's work as your own.  Do not cheat!!!!
 
Good luck with your TP's.  And we are here to help.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Optional: write Java, earn $10, advance science
Hi all.  This is optional and can be safely ignored if you wish, but it's also a way to earn $10 while advancing science and using your "basic knowledge of Java", if you have that.  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David

MellonHeads' CollabNight II: Art + Code, tonight 7:30pm
Hi all.  Here's an optional, fun event for tonight, organized by Avi Romanoff, former 112 student and part of the growing "CMU Maker" community.
 
Meanwhile, I hope you are enjoying the lovely spring weather and making fabulous strides on your term projects.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Do you want your own blue hoodie? (112-f15 CA applications now being accepted) (due today!)
Hi all.  As you dive into your term projects and prepping for the upcoming final, we have to start preparing in earnest for the fall semester (wow, time flies!).  And part of that is hiring some fabulous new CA's to join our world-class staff.  And maybe that includes you!!!
 
This is a highly competitive position, and we usually get 5-10 applicants per open position.  Even so, the only way for us to consistently maintain an awesome staff is to consistently attract an awesome pool of candidates.  So we encourage you to apply.
 
Note that we don't care specifically about your grade, but we do care a lot about your technical mastery of the 112 material, and these things (grade and mastery) are typically related.  And so....  We expect the median 112 grade of accepted applicants to be around 97 or 98, but...  We do hire some CA's with lower grades, especially if you struggled at first but now are really shining.  If your grade is below 90, then it is very unlikely we would hire you at this time, but we strongly encourage you to take 15-121 or 15-122 and shine there, then apply to CA 112 after that!  Or even after taking 15-213, 15-150, and 15-251 as well!  Plenty of CA's have followed that path!
 
Also: beyond technical mastery, we are very much looking for great teachers and team players with superb social skills.  These are absolutely essential traits for a CA.  We certainly will not just take the top N ranked by grades!
 
Also, know this:  while this is a very fun and very satisfying job, it is also very demanding, technically, logistically, and sometimes even spiritually.  It is not something to be undertaken lightly.
 
As for load: CA's work on average 12.5 hours per week (with no weeks off, and with some push weeks, such as this one!).  So think of CA'ing as taking a 12-unit course.  Plan accordingly.  If you don't have time for a 12-unit course, you don't have time to CA.
 
Then there's this:  for very good reasons, you may only work up to 20 hrs/week total for the university while being a student.  So if you have another paid job in the fall, it would have to be for no more than 7.5 hrs/week.
 
Still interested?  If so, please fill out this form (due today!  CA's work on a same-day-turnaround basis, so CA applicants should do so, too).
 
Thank you for your time and interest.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

midterm2 grades
Hi all.  Thanks to an amazing all-day grading extravaganza (thanks, CA's!!!), midterm2's are now graded and released in autolab.  The results were very good and certainly reflective of your sustained hard work and considerable learning, with a raw median of 78, a fine result for midterm2, as it covers some challenging topics.  We adjusted every score by +4 (and the adjusted scores are in autolab), so the adjusted median is 82.  Top adjusted score was a whopping 107, with another at 106, and fully 20 scoring 100 or higher.  Woohoo!  Nice job!
 
This result also drove the overall course average back up over 85 (with a top overall average of 100.5 -- fabulous!).  Woohoo!  And the term projects and final should push that even higher.  Woohoo**2!!!
 
Given that we will not have recitation for a while, the graded midterms will be returned by your CA's sometime after Sunday 6pm and hopefully before Tuesday, when we'll have an optional midterm2 solution session (details to be posted here soon).
 
All these topics (and even these specific questions) are fair game for the final exam, which is just over 3 weeks away (!!!), so this also serves as a handy heads-up on where you should focus your studying in that time.
 
In particular, collectively your understanding of Monte Carlo is rock solid, and your general understanding of recursion is pretty good, but you may wish to study the recursion and OOP examples/case studies even more, focusing on backtracking, and OOPy animations (like OOPy Frogger).
 
Given that our final exam is just one short weekend after the term project due date, you probably would do best not to plan on cramming that weekend, but rather spreading out your final exam studying across the entire remaining time you have.  Sure, you're busy now, but you'll also be busy then...
 
In any case, congrats on finishing phase 2 of the course, and doing so very well.   Kudos!!!
 
Now onto phase 3:  term projects and final exam prep.  Good luck!!!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

What a brilliant day for a puzzle hunt!!!! :-)
Really!
 
Mr. Blue Sky's up there waitin' and today Is the day we've waited for!
 
Read about the event here:  @3696
 
Register for the event here:   http://goo.gl/forms/MKxq27EHFl
 
 
Have fun!!!
 
David

You should do the 112 Puzzle Hunt!!!!!
Hi all.  Our awesome CA's put a lot of energy into making the 112 Puzzle Hunt (thanks, CA's!!!).  It'll be good fun for everyone!!!!
 
We sure hope you partake!
 
See @3696.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Some important TP Q&A (required but hopefully helpful reading)
Q: When is tp1 due?
A: Wed 15-Apr at 8pm (and if this is news to you, then please read the tp handout more carefully!)
 
Q: When is the last submission date for tp1?
A: Wed 15-Apr at 8pm
 
Q: So we cannot submit tp1 late?
A: Nope.  No late submissions for tp1, tp2, or tp3.  Only on-time submissions will be accepted, so please be sure to plan accordingly.
 
Q: Can I hire a tutor to help me with my term project?
A: Yes and no.  You can have a tutor help you so long as you very clearly cite the code that they help you produce.  That code will not count as your original code, so you will not get credit for it, but you certainly may use it, just as you'd use any other code or module from anyone else.  Just be sure to cite it properly.
 
Q: Do we have to meet with our mentors this weekend?
A: No, but it's a good idea to do so.
 
Q: When do we have to meet with our mentors?
A: Right after the tp1 deadline.
 
That's enough fro now.  More Q&A later.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Final exam conflict? Sign up today for the alternate 112 final exam!
Hi all.  Our university-assigned final exam time is Mon 4-May 5:30-8:30pm.  Check out this list carefully to see if you have a university-approved conflict.  There are 2 such cases:  either an exam at the same time, or 3 exams (including 112) in a 25-hour window.  Note that 3 exams in a 26-hour window does not qualify, so please stick to the official university-approved terms.

We will provide an alternate 112 final exam for students who have a university-approved conflict.  Also, this does not apply to students who are normally proctored by Larry Powell's office -- you should continue to work directly with them for the final exam, too.
 
In any case, if you have a university-approved conflict, please fill out this form today (now, ideally) so we know about the conflict and so we can choose a maximally-convenient alternate exam date and time.
 
Thanks!

David


Mentors are assigned!
Hi all.  The TP Mentor lottery is completed.  Nearly everyone got one of their top picks, and for the rest, you still got a great mentor!!!!  :-)
 
In any case, you should be hearing from your assigned mentor very soon, by tomorrow morning in any case.  If for some reason you've not heard from your mentor by noon tomorrow, please email me.
 
And you should respond to them, and you should meet with them regularly.  Frequency matters more than duration.  Keep them in the loop.  Let them know your plans, your progress, your concerns.  They are not there to debug your code, nor even to give you ideas.  They may do that, time permitting, but that's not their job.  Their job is to keep you on track, to be sure you are converging on a successful term project, to give you some general idea about the grade range you might perhaps be heading towards, and ultimately to assign your grade (though that last part is in conjunction with several others).
 
Also, here's some crucial math:  CA's work 12.5 hours per week, but when you take away grading, OH, piazza, review sessions, and such, and divide by the 9-or-so mentees per CA, that comes out to less than one hour per mentee per week.  That's total. It includes meetings, grading, and everything else.  And that means that they have very little time, if any, to help you debug.  That's why.  We hope you understand.  In any case, it's a case of simple math that they simply do not have time to heroically help you.
 
Nor should they!  It's really important that you show that you can do this yourself.  We know they can do it.  That's how they earned that blue hoodie!  This is your time to shine.
 
You can do it.  We are here to help.
 
Good luck!!!

David

Kinect2's (borrow one!) and a mini-Kinect2-workshop tomorrow 7:30pm
 
Hi all.  We have only 5 sign-ups so far for Kinect loans, so I think I may have undersold this.

It really is a GREAT opportunity.  Kinects are really cool, really powerful, and now that they can be used directly from Python without C#, they are easier to use than the less-powerful opencv+webcams, and you can probably make a really fun and interesting term project using a Kinect.  More of you should be giving it a go, I think.

To that end:  first, everyone who signed up so far to borrow a Kinect can get one.  Please pick them up at my 1pm OH tomorrow.
 
Second, we still have over 10 more to lend.  Please use this form to sign up for them.  First-come, first-served.
 
Third, Vasu and Lukas are kindly offering a ?Kinect mini-workshop? tomorrow (Friday) at 7:30pm for one hour max (thanks, Vasu and Lukas!!!!).  Please meet at the GHC 5th floor Citadel Commons then.
 
If you plan to attend the workshop, please first borrow a Kinect device.
 
Thanks also to Microsoft for providing all these great resources for us.  I do hope more of you take advantage of them.  We?re not pushing Microsoft, for sure, but we are pushing this really powerful and engaging technology.  We hope to see some great term projects using them.
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

hw9 grace days issue
Hi all.  We've received a number of reports that Autolab may have incorrectly charged late days in place of grace days on hw9.  We are looking into it (well, Anqi is (thanks, Anqi!!)).
 
There is a chance it's fine, and when we created the 4th grace day, which we did, Autolab may have then changed an earlier late day of yours to a grace day.  I think that's quite likely, in fact.
 
But it's also possible that Autolab is just being weird.
 
If it's that latter case, don't panic.  We will stand by our policy, and we will get this sorted out eventually.  So don't worry, it's fine.
 
If you are, or think you are, affected by this, please just email Anqi and give us a bit of time to sort through this.

Thanks ,and sorry for the confusion.
 
David

Schedule for next 10 days (no recitation, lecture Tuesday, not Thursday)
Hi again.  Some important schedule notes:
 
* No recitation this week (midterm grading) or next week (Carnival)
* Lecture next week is only on Tuesday (no lecture on Thursday due to Carnival)
* 112 Puzzle Hunt is this Saturday (fun!)
* Mini-lectures are next week on Tue/Wed nights.  Attend any one (or more).

We resume a more normal schedule after Carnival.
 
Carpe diem!

David

Reminder: Mentor Sign-Up Form due at 10:30am today
See @3654.
 
Most of you have signed up already (whew), but about 100 of you have not yet done so.  At 10:31am we'll run the lottery!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw9 grades and code review reports
Hi all.  Hw9 grades were just released (thanks, CA's!!!).  The median was a rock-solid 90, which is quite nice for the harder recursion hw.  Good job!  Two students tied for the top score with 102.  Sweet!
 
As for code reviews:  you can find your peer feedback (which was anonymized, so they didn't know it was your code they were reviewing) in the Code Review grade comments.  Note that these comments did not influence your actual grade at all.  In any case, please check these out.  Please read your peers' feedback on your code, and please take it to heart!
 
Also: a few of you will not have peer review comments (we had a few more submissions than reviews).  If you are in that camp, you landed there randomly, and it of course had no impact on your grade.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

CA Term Project OH Schedule (effective immediately)
Hi all.  As we complete the second phase of the course (and congrats for that!), we now move into the term project phase in earnest.  Woohoo!
 
Among various other changes, this includes moving into our CA Term Project OH Schedule:
 
Monday-Tuesday: 6-8 in GHC 5th floor commons
Wednesday-Friday: 6-8 in GHC 5210
Saturday: 2-6 in GHC 5210
Sunday: 2-8 in GHC 5210
This change is effective immediately.
Also, CA's will be very busy mentoring and grading TP's throughout the TP period, so they do not have as much time for OH or piazza.  That's ok, even ideal, because you are mostly supposed to do this on your own (well, with the help of The Universe, or at least that portion of The Universe that's indexed by Google) (and with proper citation, of course).  If you cannot do your project mainly on your own, you need to choose a different project!  In any case:  while OH is offered every day, we'll have fewer CA's on duty than during homework OH.  Also, TP questions can take longer to answer, so understand that the 3-to-5-minute-rule may be extended at times as appropriate.  On the other hand, OH cannot devolve into a private tutoring session, not while there is a queue at least.  I'm sure everyone understands all this, but it's best to get it out there anyhow.
Be independent.  Use OH and piazza, but use them sparingly and only when really stuck.  But mainly, be independent.
Good luck with your TP's!!!!  And have fun!!!
David

Using Kinect2's from Python (and borrow a Kinect2) (requests due by 10:30am tomorrow!)
Hi all.  Our good friends at Microsoft got the new Kinect2 devices working from Python now!  Woohoo!  This is really cool.  Unfortunately, to use this you must have a Windows 8.1 computer, and also a USB 3 port.  If you have that, and if you are interested in borrowing a Kinect2 to try this out over the weekend (and longer if you get it working and use it for your term project), then please fill out this form tonight (or by 10:30am tomorrow in any case).
 
I'll email folks tomorrow during the midterm to let you know who can borrow Kinects (if we get too many requests, we'll have a random lottery).
 
If you win the lottery, please pick up your Kinect2 device at my office between noon and 1pm tomorrow.
 
Also, for anyone who has a Kinect2 (borrowed or not) who wishes to try this out, here is a helpful starter file that Lukas and Vasu wrote (thanks, Lukas and Vasu!):
PyKinect2Started.pdf
 
Have fun!!!

David

My OH: half tomorrow, half Friday
Hi all.  Please note that my OH for tomorrow is split over 2 days as such:
 
Tomorrow: noon to 1pm
 
Friday:  1pm to 2pm
 
Thanks.

David

TP Mentor Sign-up Form (required, due tomorrow at 10:30am)
Hi all.  Please fill out this form today (now, ideally) listing your preferences and any anti-preferences for your TP mentor.
 
The form is due no later than 10:30am tomorrow, and right after that we'll run the lottery and assign mentors.  You should hear from your assigned mentor no later than Friday of this week.
 
Preference will be given to mentors from the same section, but after that we'll assign them in a lottery for maximum fairness.
 
Anyone who does not sign up will be assigned randomly.
 
Good luck with it, and...  Carpe diem.
 
David

Congrats, do study, don't stress, get enough sleep, good luck, and then...
Hi all.  This is a busy, transitional time in the semester....
 
* Congrats on finishing the hw's!
Way to go!  And your hw10's look great, at least after a quick pass.  Kudos!  Truly, it's been a long climb, and you've reached this peak.  A couple more peaks lie just ahead, but still, congrats on this victory!
 
* Do study for the midterm
The best way to study for midterm2 at this point is with depth over breadth.  That is, don't keep looking for new materials to study, but rather learn the materials you have already covered even better.  In particular, be sure you can reproduce examples / case studies in the notes from scratch, without memorizing but rather with understanding from first principles.  That's your best bet.  Then, time permitting, move on to recent quizzes and hw's.  Then, time permitting, stop studying!  :-)

* Don't stress
Studying too much is counterproductive.  And being over-stressed is very counterproductive.  It not only doesn't help, it hurts.  Besides, you'll be fine, really.  So don't stress!  And do study, but not too much.  Keep your balance.  And if you can't help it, and stress builds up (as it sometimes does despite your best intentions), then head over to the gym, or go for a (soggy) walk/jog/run, or play some Quidditch, etc.  Exercise is the world's best stress reliever.  In any case, keep your stress down, in whatever way works for you.
 
* Get enough sleep!
This is a biggie, and while I've said it many times, it's worth repeating, because it's the single easiest way to quickly change your performance (in either direction).  Science says you need 8 hours each night.  The consensus among students here seems to be closer to 7 hours being required (few students argue you need less than that).  Yet I bet the actual average here is closer to 5-6 hours per night, which is way too little sleep.  And that backfires, almost immediately, with less learning, higher stress, and lower grades.  And energy drinks (or self-prescribed medication of any sort) does not fix this.  Studies prove it, but who needs studies.  We've all seen those tired-and-wired students who have not slept enough so their brains don't work well, but who drank buckets of energy drinks so their poorly-working brains can't sleep.  It's awful.  They are awake, and talk quickly, but not all that intelligibly.  So it goes on their exams when they are in that state.  They write a lot, but their grades don't go up.  So there's simply no value in being like that, but lots of cost -- to your health, to your stress, to your grades.  So:  don't do that!!!!  Get your sleep!!!!
 
* Good luck!
Luck favors a prepared mind, and collectively you are prepared, so may you enjoy your good luck!  The best way to be "lucky" is to prepare well, keep your stress down, get plenty of sleep, and give yourself your best chance at success.
 
* And then...
Right now, your 112 efforts should be going into the midterm, as it is tomorrow.  But once it is over, we head into a crucial weekend -- post-midterm and pre-Carnival.  You'll be squarely in the term project phase, and you need to dive in full-tilt.  Make tons of progress early, that's easily your best path to low-stress and high-success on your TP.  This weekend is very important for that!  There's also the 112 Puzzle Hunt, which should be really good fun, and a nice way to take a break from your TP work.  In any case, after midterm1 you had spring break so you could spin down and relax for a week, but that's not at all the case with midterm2.  After midterm2, you should lean in and get the most out of this weekend and the coming week.
 
As always, we're here to help.
 
Carpe diem!

David

My OH end at 1:45pm today
Hi all.  Please note that my OH will end just a bit early, at 1:45pm today.
 
Thanks.
 
David

APT Puzzle Tournament 2015 (on 25-Apr, register by 21-Apr)
Hi all.  Here is another great and entirely optional non-112 opportunity for some of you (posted here because, while not a 112 activity, it is probably of interest to some or perhaps many of you).
 
Our good friends at APT, who also kindly sponsor our Term Project Showcase, are hosting a puzzle tournament on Sat Apr 25.  Unlike our 112 puzzle hunt, which is designed so everyone in 15-112 can participate, the APT puzzle tournament may be a bit too challenging for some 15-112 students.  That said, I think many of you could participate, and have a blast. It was super-well-received last year by those who did it.  If you are interested, please see Margaret Schervish's email below, and form a team and register by 21-Apr.
 
If you do, and I hope some of you do, then:  GOOD LUCK!!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Free food, interesting talk on bionics this Thursday at noon (HBH1000)
Hi all.  This is entirely optional, but also looks to be entirely interesting.  And yummy.

If you still need a group TP discussion (say, for grace/late day submissions)
Hi all.  Apparently, a small group of you still need to do the group TP discussion.  If you are in that group, please show up tomorrow at OH at 6pm or 8pm.  Again, the CA's will try to help form groups then.
 
This is the final call for this.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

If you missed your group for hw10...
Hi all.  At least one of you just reported failing to meet with your group for hw10.  If you are in that same boat, do this:  go to OH tonight at 6pm or 8pm.  At each of those times, the CA's on duty will try to organize interested parties into groups.
 
Hope this helps, and good luck wrapping up hw10.

David

112++ Content Production Opportunities for Summer and Fall
 
[This is entirely optional reading and has nothing to do with the current semester's 15-112.]
 
Hi all.
 
Please read this carefully, and then if you are interested, please find the link to the poll at the bottom of this notice, and fill it out today.  Thanks!  Note that everyone who responds by tomorrow night will be considered, though after that we?ll proceed in the order we receive applications, until all the available slots are filled.  
 
As many of you know, we are embarking on an exciting new effort to create a wide-ranging collection of free, world-class, online, interactive, autograded educational materials.  We will focus our efforts initially on supporting 15-112, and so this project is informally referred to as 112++ (only an internal name, we?ll think of something more clever and catchy when we go live with it).  While we want to support the CMU instance of 15-112, we are also looking to build this collection to support courses at other colleges (taught by their faculty, with their own staff, etc), where they may consume individual portions (large or small) of our content a la carte.  We hope that this becomes a significant resource for the wider CS education community.  Note that we are not envisioning this as a MOOC, and have no current plans to release it as such (though we could see it being used that way at some time, by someone, it?s just not on our radar at this time).  Also, it is our strong intention and desire to keep this free of charge ? we have secured funding for now to do so, and plan to do so indefinitely.
 
How might this involve you?  Easy.   Our intention is for students to create much of the interactive content.  Initially, we (the 15-112 faculty) will provide most of the curriculum and content designs,  and students will build and test those designs.  Our hope is for this to go very well (of course), and in time for students to be able to contribute more to the design phase, perhaps eventually contributing entirely original designs. In any case, you should anticipate building lots of really cool, engaging, practical, and hopefully popular online content.  We also plan to host student-authored portfolios, so you can easily showcase your 112++ contributions to future employers and other interested parties.
 
We have separate opportunities for the summer and for the fall.
 
For the summer, we can hire 5-10 full-time (and possibly some part-time) student content developers working here at CMU (remote work is unlikely to be available this summer).  These are paid positions, though at or near minimum wage (we hope you understand: our funding is not extensive, and besides, we see the chief value residing in the learning experience, and in adding to your resume, similar to being a TA or research assistant).
 
For the fall, instead of paid summer internships, we will run a course (15-539) in CS Pedagogy.  It will be 6-12 units, depending on how much time and effort you can invest into the course.  In that course, we will add some additional activities to ensure that you learn about CS Pedagogy (in the context of 112++, of course), and further we?ll add some assessments of your work as a basis for your semester grade.  Students will generally be grouped in small teams, each team probably working on one interactive exercise at a time.
 
We imagine you have many more questions, but we probably cannot answer most of them (sorry).  We are inventing this as we go, and we are looking for people who are ok with the uncertainty that goes with that approach.  For example, even now we are designing the architecture.  We have not yet decided if it will run entirely in a browser, if it will work with languages besides Python (or besides English), etc, etc, etc.  We?ll make some initial decisions before summer, flesh these out during more open-ended work over the summer, and then make some final decisions for how we?ll create content in the fall.  Given this rapid timeframe, there is some chance that we?ll revise these decisions later in a non-backwards-compatible way, and so we?d then have to patch our content to work with the new version of our system.  That?s fine.
 
This approach let?s us hit the ground running, which we intend to do!  It is our goal for 112 in the fall to use this new online content as much as possible, and for 112 next spring to be 100% based on these new materials.  We further hope that outside courses start experimenting with some of the material in the fall, and using it more extensively in the spring.  We can do it!  You can help!
 
One more thing:  while we very much welcome interested students to apply, we also only have a fixed number of slots available, both for the summer and the fall.  And so we will probably have interviews and/or some other selection process.  In any case, decisions will be made very soon.
 
Also: note that this is entirely independent of 112 CA opportunities..  It is possible, at least in theory, to do both of these, as they are separate efforts.  112++ is about online educational content creation, and involves no direct teaching.  Conversely, CA?ing 112 is of course about directly teaching and involves no online content creation.  If you are interested in being a 112 CA, we welcome your interest, but you need to respond separately to me (that separate email seeking CA applicants will go out in a week or two, after which interviews will begin shortly).
 
Finally, as for pre-requisites:  besides being utterly dedicated to this cause, the only strict pre-requisite we have is that you have completed 15-112 (or are currently taking it), and that you have a strong mastery of 112 material (and we?ll teach you whatever else you need to know).  We have no specific grade requirement at this time, but it is likely that most (perhaps all) accepted applicants would have A averages in 112, preferably even high-A averages, though we are open to considering all applicants.
 
For now, if you are interested in applying for either the summer or the fall, please fill out this poll with details of your application.
 
Thanks for your interest.  And? Carpe diem.
 
David

Sticky triangle lengths
Hi again.  Last post for a while (Duke - Mich St is about to tip off, and my wife and kids have the guacamole and chips ready to go...).
 
Many of you are asking about what length to use for the sticky triangle's perimeter.  The length does not matter.
 
Many are also asking about how find gradations you should use for the breaking points.  Like, if the length was 12345, could you use randint(1, 12345) to find a breaking point?  This DOES matter, and the answer is no, you may not do that.  Why not?  Because nothing in the problem specifies integer breaking points, so you are omitting lots of valid breaking points that happen not to be at integer values.
 
There's a good way to proceed:  why not make the perimeter 1, and then just use random floats between 0 and 1 for the breaking points?   And that is quite easy to do in Python.  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
And good luck with your brackets (for those of you with brackets).
 
David

Do not miss your CA-led code reviews. Be on time, too!
Hi all.  If you need to miss a CA-led code review, please have the common courtesy to email your CA ahead of time.  Otherwise, be there, on time, ready to participate fully.
 
Being on time, properly prepared, and ready to contribute are the bare basics of professionalism that we expect from all of you, and that your future employers will most certainly demand of you.
 
Now is the time to start demanding this of yourself.
 
Thanks...  And Carpe diem.

David

hw10: f14-midterm2-#1.3 is not required
Hi all.   We had a slight oversight and left this problem ( f14-midterm2-#1.3, the one where (isinstance(B(), A) and (B() == A(1, 2)))) in the hw, even though it requires using inheritance and super, which we did not cover this semester. Whoops.  Sorry about that.
 
So: you do not have to do it.
 
It'd be nice to award bonus points for those of you who already did it, but alas, it's too small a problem for that, really (just a tiny part of a part of a hw).  So let's award Life Bonus Points..  +23.  :-)
 
Seriously, this is good stuff to know, even though we did not cover it this semester, and it will not appear on midterm2 or the final exam.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw10 tidbits (efficient coprime, test fn's, magic 6)
Hi all.  A few things about hw10:
 
* efficient coprime
To check if two numbers (x,y) are coprime, you may not check all the possible factors from 2 up to min(x,y) to see if they are factors of both numbers.  This works, but it is way too slow.  Instead, think about how you might use gcd here.  Pretty awesome that Euclid gave us that algorithm and so, so much else around 2500 years ago (having to write it all out in longhand Greek, without algebra or variables or numbers with place values or even the concept of axiomatic proof (which he invented)).  Awesome.
 
* Test functions
We are getting lots of questions about how to test the hw10 functions.  First, read the writeup, which talks about this.  Second, for most functions in hw10, you at least know they need to return a float, and then between 0.0 and 1.0 (right?).  So that's something to test.   And you probably can narrow the range tighter than that.  For example, if testing the probability of getting heads in one coin flip, you can't say that it has to equal 0.5 since there is some variance expected with Monte Carlo techniques, but we could test that it's reasonably close to 0.5, right?  Just narrow the range as much as you can, within reason, without using any advanced math concepts, and then use a very (very!) liberal almostEquals, and then if your test mostly passes but occasionally fails, that's ok.  :-)
 
* 6 is a magic number
Just sayin'...  Of course, you could do this:
    sides = 6
And now it's not magic.  Easy peasy.
 
Good luck with it.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

writeFile for hw10/f14-midterm2/#8
Hi all.  You'll need this function to complete hw10/f14-midterm2/#8:
 
def writeFile(filename, contents, mode="wt"):
    # wt = "write text"
    with open(filename, mode) as fout:
        fout.write(contents)
 
This will create a new file of the given name with the given contents (which should be a string).
 
This and other File I/O functions can be found here.
 
Note that File I/O will not be on midterm2, but you do need it for this particular problem on the hw.
 
Enjoy.
 
David

Less is more! More is less! (Well, usually...)
Hi all.  This is very important advice for your term projects (and more generally, too!).
 
You cannot turn a B product into an A product just by producing more of it!
 
To be specific:  if you have a game with 2 or 3 nice levels, and they are ok but not great, and nice enough for a B, but lacking the sophistication required for an A, then....  Adding more levels will not get you an A, no matter how many more levels you add.
 
In fact, at that point, adding more levels will in essence lower your grade, since you'll be spending your precious time doing that (which has no value at all, grade-wise), instead of doing something else that is more sophisticated, and more able to actually positively impact your grade.
 
Your time is precious.  Spend it as such.
 
And remember:  less is more.
 
Build the least you can, while making it as nice as possible.
 
If you have time, add to it, but then add incrementally.  One thing at a time.  Each thing should not just be *more*, but overtly *better*, a significant technical improvement that adds directly to your grade.
 
Of course, we are happy to help you convert this general rule into specific advice in the context of your project.  For that, please talk to me, or Prof Andersen, or your CA's.  Or all of the above.  We are here to help.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

The big picture
Hi again.  Having just posted quiz8 grades, with a median of 71, it's helpful to also look at the big pictures now, to put that in some perspective.
 
Including quiz8, the current median course average is 84.9, which is rock solid.  Recall that historically this goes up over the second half of the course, so we expect an even stronger median by semester's end, maybe even 86 or so, which would be superb!   You can do it!
 
Also, having talked to maybe half of you now about your term projects, I am really encouraged as to where we stand there.  Collectively, you are off to a really strong and promising start.  I expect this semester's projects to be among the best ever.
 
Of course, you have to stand and deliver.  But you surely can, and I believe you will.
 
This is a busy and important time for that.  You have hw10, midterm2, and the term project all going on at once.  And you need to make solid progress on all of them this weekend, since Carnival lies ahead, and the end of the semester is rapidly approaching.
 
This is a weekend to focus and to make great strides.
 
Carpe diem!!!!
 
David

quiz8 grades
Hi all.  Quiz8 grades are posted (and thanks, CA's, for yet another one-day quiz grading turnaround!).
 
The results were fair, with a median of 71, and a top grade of 103 (woohoo).  Here is the distribution:
 

 
This quiz should give you a clear idea of how you should prep for the upcoming midterm.  We will certainly ask some very similar questions to quiz8, and a bunch of other questions, most of which will be closely tied to the hw and the examples / case studies in the notes (along with any reasonable variants; say, writing combinations(n) instead of permutations(n)).

Be sure you can write all the examples / case studies and hw problems from scratch, without much effort.  That takes practice, practice, practice.
 
Of course, practice takes time.  But with a reduced hw10, you have time.  Well, some time, at least.
 
Use it wisely.  And practice, practice, practice.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Be sure to back up your TP code, over and over again!
Hi all.  Nearly every semester, at least one student winds up accidentally losing part of all of their term project.  Sometimes they delete the files, sometimes their hard drive crashes, sometimes they change working code into broken code and cannot recover the earlier-working code, etc, etc, etc.
 
The thing is:  all of this is normal and predictable.
 
And so, the ONLY defense is:  backup your code.  Religiously.
 
A very good start is to keep your code in a cloud-backed folder, say using Google Drive or Box or Dropbox.  That's a good start.
 
In addition, entirely separately, I suggest that you keep your term project in a folder, and you do backup the entire folder once a day into folders named by the day, such as tp-03-apr, tp-04-apr, etc.  Do not delete any of these until after your term project is completely graded.  It's just your safest bet.
 
Storing bits is cheap.  Losing bits is really, really expensive.
 
So: store your bits.  Lots of them.  With redundancy.
 
Let's aim for 0% lost work this semester!!!!
 
Good luck, and be safe out there.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw10 is posted and due Sunday at 10pm
Hi all.  As the subject line says: hw10 is posted and due Sunday at 10pm.
 
And by Sunday 10:01pm (well, for most of you), you'll be done with all the 15-112 homeworks!  Then after the small matter of our second midterm, you can really dive into your term projects!  Woohoo!
 
Note: last submission for hw10 is Tuesday at 8pm.
 
Also note:  this is not a very heavy nor especially hard hw.  The first bonus (Texas Hold'Em) was going to be on the hw, but in the end we moved it to bonus to keep the hw light, leaving you time to think about your term projects and to start prepping for the upcoming midterm.  Even so, it's a fun and interesting bonus and we hope many of you do it.  So is the Polya Urn bonus, by the way (though that one is much less specified, so there's plenty of room for you have to fun with it!).
 
Enjoy!

David

Interesting new summer course offering: 80-214 Computing, Artificial Intelligence, and Philosophy
Hi all.  Please see the following post about a new course being offered this summer that may interest you, and which you may take after completing 15-112.  If you are interesting, please contact Mate Szabo directly at mszabo@andrew.cmu.edu. 
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

A few notes about hw9
Hi all.  Just a few things:
 
* Regarding everything: it's plain that some of you are trying to do the hw without first being able to write the case studies in the notes.  That's not going to work out very well (and that's a serious understatement).  Even at this late time, if you are in that group, you should stop doing hw9, and go back and study the notes until you can write those functions.
 
* Also, what if you can't write a function or two?  Say you don't get solveABC working.  That's ok.  Just give it your best shot.  Of course it's best to get it working, but you still have to stay within your limits.  You have to get some sleep, keep up with your other courses, etc.  Give this what you can, and if you can't finish a problem, so be it.  Then go to the solution session and do your best to understand it then.
 
* Regarding fractal mickey, the writeup uses last semester's framework.  You can use this semester's framework, or last semester's, or raw Tkinter, whichever you prefer, no problem.
 
* Also regarding fractal mickey:  don't worry too much about what "level 0" means.  The base level, whatever it is, should have a regular mickey face.
 
* Regarding OH: questions this week generally take longer, so CA's will have to spend more time with each student.  It's just how recursion goes.  So the queue will take longer to clear.  Let's all be understanding about this.  We'll all do our best...
 
* Also regarding OH: tomorrow may get really busy.  We'll do our best to manage it, but really, you should plan on a long queue as the deadline approaches.  Don't get stressed about it.  Just do your best.  We'll do our best, too.
 
Good luck with it.
 
Almost there...
 
David

findLargestFile cannot use listFiles (and a hint)
Hi all.  This does not seem fundamentally recursive:
 
   * use listFiles to get a list of files
   * iteratively, find the size of all the files in the list
   * return the largest
 
That feels like gratuitously creating a list expressly to avoid using a properly-written recursive solution, and so it's not what we are looking for for findLargestFile.
 
Don't create a list that you traverse later.
 
Here's a hint, though:  one way to solve this is to first create a helper function that not only returns the path to the largest file, but does so in a tuple that also includes some other important information.  Then, your findLargestFile can use that helper function, but still just return only the path as the problem statement requires.  Be sure you understand this hint (though it's just a hint, and you can ignore it and solve this however you wish, so long as you use recursion in some fundamental way).
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

On using iteration in hw9 (basically, yes, it's fine)
Hi all.  We're getting lots of questions about this, so hopefully this will put the issue to rest.
 
Last week, you could not use iteration in hw8's recursive portion because every question was solvable using *only* iteration, and the whole point of last week was to practice using recursion, and the only way to ensure that was to outright disallow iteration.
 
That was last week.
 
This week, by contrast, the questions are harder, using recursion in more interesting and perhaps fundamental ways.  There is no reason to have that no-iteration restriction, and we don't have it.
 
The only rule is that you must use recursion in some fundamental way when solving each problem (though, practically, you have to do so anyhow).
 
With that one very loose rule, everything else is fair game.  So you may and should use iteration in numerous places throughout hw9.  Please don't ask when and where.  Use your own sound judgment to determine that.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

hw9: all manually graded
Hi all.  One last post for now...  Please note that all of hw9 will be manually graded (no autograding).
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

hw9 CA-moderated code reviews
Hi all.  Please note: This is not a change in what you are assigned to do for hw9, only an additional step we will take this week after the hw9 deadline,
 
Following the hw9 deadline, we will have "CA-moderated code reviews" where students will meet in small groups and review each others' anonymized code, both for style and correctness. This is not a grading session, and students will not be grading each others' code. What's more, the anonymized code will be from anonymous students in other sections of the course.

Code reviews are a standard practice in industry, and they are an invaluable tool in helping both the reviewers and the reviewees improve their understanding of what constitutes good code and how to more reliably write good code. These meetings will be required, and will take one-half hour. This activity will be worth 5 points, which will be awarded based on participation.
 
Have fun!  And..  Carpe diem.

David

Memoization without the @memoized decorator
Hi all.  You are not responsible for the @memoized decorator in last semester's notes.  Here is how we did memoization using a global this semester:
 
# memoization examples that work as covered in lecture, and that
# do not use the @memoized decorator (since you are not responsible
# for using decorators this semester.)

###############################################
# First, the problem....
###############################################

def fib(n):
    if (n < 2):
        return 1
    else:
        return fib(n-1) + fib(n-2)

import time
def testFib():
    print "Computing fib(0), fib(1), fib(2),... for 2 seconds...",
    start = time.time()
    n = 0
    while (time.time() - start < 2):
        nextFib = fib(n)
        n += 1
    print "up to fib(%d)
" % n

print "Non-memoized fib:"
testFib() # gets to fib(33) on my machine

###############################################
# Now, a solution that memoizes into a global
###############################################

memoizedFibValues = dict()

def fib(n):
    args = (n,)
    if (args in memoizedFibValues):
        return memoizedFibValues[args]
    if (n < 2):
        result = 1
    else:
        result = fib(n-1) + fib(n-2)
    memoizedFibValues[args] = result
    return result

print "Memoized fib using a global:"
testFib() # now makes it up to fib(228020) on my machine!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Do not use mutable default arguments in functions!
Hi all.   This is a major Python gotcha!  You should never use mutable default arguments in functions.  Here is an example of how weird the resulting behavior can be:
 
# example showing how awful mutable default args are
def f(x, a=[]):
    a.append(x)
    return len(a)

print f("wow")    # prints 1, as expected
print f("oh no!") # we would expect 1, but it prints 2,
                  # because only one default list is ever created!
 
Yuck!  Best to avoid this and find another way.

Carpe diem.

David

Recursive sorting (except bubblesort) --> next week
Hi all.  Please note that recursive sorting (except bubblesort, which remains part of hw9) is moved to next week.   Practically, this means:
 
* Recursive sorting (except bubblesort) will not be on the next quiz, but...
 
* Recursive sorting may be on the next midterm and/or the final.
 
As for bubblesort, we covered it earlier this semester iteratively, so this is just translating that to be recursive, though it also must be non-destructive (so instead of swapping elements, just return a new list with those elements swapped).
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw9 and recursion notes current (posted unchanged)
Hi all.  To allay concerns over late changes, there are none.
 
Hw9 is just as pre-released, with the one change we announced of replacing the sodoku bonus with a peg solitaire bonus.
 
The recursion notes are also unchanged, except for adding the callWithLargeStack that we already posted.
 
Note that the recursion examples use the animation framework from last semester, but that's not a problem at all, since the point of them has nothing to do with animations, per se, and everything to do with fractals, backtracking, and other recursion issues, which are independent of whatever animation framework you may use.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

recursion notes status and improved callWithLargeStack
Hi all.  For today, we'll continue to use last semester's recursion notes.  They are usable as-is, so that's ok, but later today or early tomorrow when I have 3-4 hours, I'll update the examples to use this semester's event-based animation framework, and I'll also get all the notes in one file (instead of a list of updates and changes to earlier versions).
 
Meanwhile, we seem to have a fix for callWithLargeStack that should work on OS X (as well as on Windows and Linux).  Until I post the updated notes tomorrow, replace the callWithLargeStack function in the notes examples with this one:
 
def callWithLargeStack(f,*args):
    import sys
    import threading
    sys.setrecursionlimit(2**14) # max recursion depth of 16384
    isWindows = (sys.platform.lower() in ["win32", "cygwin"])
    if (not isWindows): return f(*args)
    threading.stack_size(2**27)  # 64MB stack
    # need new thread to get the redefined stack size
    def wrappedFn(resultWrapper): resultWrapper[0] = f(*args)
    resultWrapper = [None]
    #thread = threading.Thread(target=f, args=args)
    thread = threading.Thread(target=wrappedFn, args=[resultWrapper])
    thread.start()
    thread.join()
    return resultWrapper[0]
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw9 pre-release
Hi all.  It's Wednesday, so...  Here is the hw9 pre-release!  Due date is Sunday at 10pm, last submission deadline with late+grace days is Tuesday 8pm.
 
All solutions must be recursive to receive any points.  You may use iteration, too, but you may only use loops where appropriate within recursive functions, such as a loop inside findLargestFile to iterate over the files within a specific folder.
 
This hw has two parts:  Part A is Collaborative (in teams of up to 3 students total), and Part B is SOLO (working alone).  You are going to submit both of these in a single file, hw9.py.  This file will contain both collaborative and solo work.  Be certain that your solo work is in fact solo!!!!  And be sure to list your collaborative partners for Part A by name and andrew id at the top of your file.
 
Part A:  Collaborative (Work in teams of up to 3 students total)
1. from f13-hw9: study the recursion notes (this semester?s, of course) [in triple-quotes] [manually graded]
2. from f11-hw5: Reasoning About (Recursive) Code  [in triple-quotes] [manually graded]
3. from f14-hw9: bubblesort [below #ignore_rest line] [manually graded]
4. from f11-hw5: fractalMickeyMouse (and mickeyFace)  [below #ignore_rest line] [manually graded]
 
Part B: SOLO (Work alone)
5. from f11-hw5: flatten [autograded]
6. from f11-hw5: findLargestFile [autograded]
7. from f13-hw9: solveABC [autograded]
 
Bonus (SOLO):
8. from f13-hw9: bonusSolveSudoku  [below #ignore_rest line] [manually graded]
9. from f14-hw9: bonusTwoStackHanoi  [below #ignore_rest line] [manually graded]
10. from f14-hw9: bonusPythagorasTree  [below #ignore_rest line] [manually graded]

Carpe diem!
 
David

HRT == Hudson River Trading
Hi all.  With my ongoing hand injury, all semester I've enjoyed (for want of a better word) seeing how my frequent typos interact with an overaggressive and borderline ridiculous spellchecker to create comical errors in my emails and posts.
 
This time, HRT turned into Hudson River Training.

While I'm sure they do provide training, that's not their name.  They are Hudson River Trading, of course.  :-)
 
Sorry for the confusion.
 
David

HRT talk, food, swag, fun: today, 6:30pm, WEH 7500
Hi all.  This is a friendly reminder that the Hudson River Training (HRT) talk is today at 6:30pm. in WEH 7500.  See @2775 for details.
 
Even with the 8pm last-submission deadline of hw8, we hope that many of you attend this talk, eat some free food, get some free swag, and learn about a really interesting use of 15-112-and-beyond CS in the real world, and perhaps also make some helpful future employment contacts.  All good things!
 
HRT has very kindly supported 15-112, both the current CA's and also our future course development efforts.  We thank them for their generous support.
 
Carpe diem!

David

Hw8 last submission still at 8pm tonight
Hi all.  We had announced in one lecture yesterday that this deadline would be shifted, but upon further reflection, we will leave it as-is.  So the hw8 last-submission deadline remains tonight at 8pm.
 
Good luck wrapping it up.
 
David

hw8 issues + extension (please read)
Hi all.  There are a few issues you should be aware of regarding hw8, and these resulted in a course-wide 1-day (well, 22 hours) extension.  Specifically:
 
* There was a problem in objectsToCsv where for some incorrect solutions the autograder would correctly grade the problem but would not report any specifics about the error, just that an error occurred.  Ugh, and sorry for the confusion.   This has been fixed, and all submissions were regraded, so if this happened to you, you can recheck your error report to get specifics about your error.
 
* As a consequence, we think everyone should get a 1-day extension.  So both parts of hw8 are due tonight at 8pm (not 10pm).
 
* The last submission deadline has not changed, though, and remains Wednesday (tomorrow) at 8pm (not 10pm).
 
* There is also a short-term weirdness regarding grace/late days.  Autolab will charge you grace/late days for *each* part of hw8a and hw8b, but this is incorrect, and is only a temporary artifact due to autolab accounting, and does not reflect course policy.  So you know:  We will treat hw8 just as we already treated hw6 (which also had two parts).  When we are done grading, we will delete hw8b, rename hw8a to just hw8, and manually add the hw8b scores into hw8.  At that point, Autolab's extra grace/late day charges will go away (whew), and we will manually add any late-day deductions from hw8b into hw8 scores.
 
The bottom line:  a week from now, everything will be ok, and autolab's late/grace day accounting will basically work according to our course policies.
 
Good luck for those of you still wrapping up hw8.
 
Carpe diem.

David

If you are considering dropping, please come see Prof Andersen or me
Hi again.  Another important note:
 
I spoke yesterday with a student who thought their grade was beyond repair, and who was reluctantly planning to drop.
 
However, it was quickly apparent that they were basically over-reacting to a few setbacks, that their work in general is plenty good enough to pass this course with an ok (and perhaps quite solid) grade, that they are learning a ton in fact, and that they should stay in the course and keep moving ahead with their academic plan.
 
That said, I also spoke with another student late last week where the exact opposite was true, and their best course of action was to drop, which they did.  They'll retake the course this summer, and they are in a commanding position now to do quite well then.
 
The point is:  there is no one-size-fits-all advice, but dropping this course after you poured so much time and effort into it should not be taken lightly.
 
So: if you are thinking about dropping, please come see Prof Andersen or me, and the sooner the better.

We will not try to talk you into or out of anything.  That's really not our job.  Instead, we'll try to be sure you have the most complete picture, the fullest understanding of your situation in this course and the implications of each of the possible outcomes you are considering.  We'll be a foil, to help you make the best decision for you.
 
It's your decision, but we are here to help.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Almost there...
Hey all.  This is the time when spirits might flag a bit.  You just had a lovely spring break, and then you have to get right back into it, full-tilt, and then with this harder material.  And it is hard.
 
But rest assured, you can do it!  We already have dozens of submissions, and the median grade so far is in fact perfect on the autograded portions.  This is hard, but doable.
 
Also, we're almost done.  This hw was advertised as harder than hw6, but not as much volume (though still a fair bit).  I think it is exactly all that.  For your planning purposes, next week is also hard, probably the hardest of the semester.  Recursion is hard, there's no way around it.

But then...  Things improve rapidly.  Week 10 (the week after recursion) will not be nearly so hard.  And then you're done with hw entirely.  Week 11 has no material, just midterm review.  And then the rest of the semester is spent working on a project of your own choosing, which hopefully will be lots of fun and not much stress.
 
So, yes, this week is hard.  It is.  And next will be hard, too.  But then you made it.
 
One week from today, you will be done with all the hard parts of 15-112.
 
You can do it!!!  And we are here to help.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

hw8a / csvToObjects: use your own classes (and: one extra submission!)
Hi all.  Turns out the autograder was overly restrictive for csvToObjects, and was accidentally requiring the solutions to use Structs, when of course you could use your own non-Struct instances if you preferred.  Whoops.  This is now fixed.
 
And...  Everyone now has an extra submission for hw8a, so that's 6 now, not 5.
 
Sorry for the confusion.

David

hw8a and hw8b autograders are live
As the subject line says...
 
Note that hw8b is in the "temp" category, just to deal with autolab accounting issues.
 
You get 5 submissions max for each hw8a and hw8b.  Use them judiciously (be sure to carefully test your code, including edge cases, before submitting!).  And be sure to place your non-autograded code below the #Ignore_rest line in each file.
 
Good luck.  And carpe diem.
 
David

** restriction and a simple workaround
Hi all.  It seems we did not clearly convey the restriction not to use ** in the recursive functions too well.  And sorry about that.  We try hard not to change the hw's after they get posted.
 
It's easy to get around not using **:
 
def power(base, expt):
    if (expt == 0): return 1
    else: return base * power(base, expt-1)
This is the easy way to exponentiate recursively, at least for non-negative integer inputs.
Hope this helps, and sorry for the confusion, and good luck with hw8.
David

Reminder: MIcrosoft Kinect Workshop tomorrow (and some other dates to save!)
Hi all.  Last post for a while.  :-)
 
This is a reminder that the Microsoft Kinect Workshop is tomorrow at 1pm in Rashid Auditorium.  This will be awesome.  It will be led by Andre Sutanto, former Head CA of 15-112, now at Microsoft, and all-round incredible engineer and person.  You'll love him, and you'll love it.  I assure you.  I hope many of you choose to attend.
 
And here are a few other dates to reserve:
 
Wed 25-Mar 6:30pm: Optional HRT Talk (this should be really informative)
 
The weekend after midterm2:  The 15-112 Puzzle Hunt!  A bunch of CA's have been working really hard to make a really fun event for all of you.  Exact date/time not set, but sometime over the weekend after midterm2.
 
Thu 30-Apr at 8pm: Term Project Presentations.  This is a required event (excepting of course the usual university-approved conflicts), though it's also a lot of fun.  
 
Mon 4-May: Final Exam (5:30pm to 8:30pm).

That's it for now.  Carpe diem.
 
David

Location of tomorrow morning's make-up CA-led lecture
Hi again.  Regarding @2820, I forgot to say where to meet.  Sorry about that.  For those attending the 8am session, please meet at the Citadel Commons in GHC 5th Floor.

Cheers.
 
David

Some minor changes in the notes
Hi again.  Here are three minor changes in this week's course notes.  Nothing major, but you should know about any edits at this point:
 
1) Added fib(n) to recursion examples.
 
2) Updated eventBasedAnimation to explicitly require at least Python 2.7, which it does as of the last release.
 
3) Edited nots to use type(p).__name__ instead of p.__class__.__name__ -- both work just fine, but the type(p) way is preferable (and thanks, Prof A, for that!).
 
That's it.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Hw8 released
Hi all.  It's out there now.  It's just the unchanged pre-release, along with a few minor hints (many already posted here), and a bonus problem (3d Tetris, again!).  :-)
 
Here are the hints:
 
You may use eval() and also exceptions (try/except) in csvToObjects.

As usual, you may not use strings in numeric problems (like nthLeftTruncatablePrime).

In your recursion problems, you may have stack overflow exceptions after a depth of 50-100 or so. This means your solutions may work for small n, but not for even moderately large n. For example, nthLeftTruncatablePrime(n) may fail around n=51 or so. That is ok for this hw. We'll discuss a workaround for this problem next week.

As discussed below, we really want you to keep Frogger simple. For instance, you may keep your intersection tests really simple, so for example, if the frog is a circle and the log is a rectangle, then you don't need to do circle-rectangle collision stuff but instead can stick with rectangle-rectangle or even point-rectangle (using the center of the frog) collision if you wish (which you should).

Also as discussed below, Frogger is underspecified, with lots of small design decisions left to you. So please do not post to piazza asking for us to decide these for you. This is good practice for your term project. Just make good decisions and have confidence in yourself. You can do this!
 
Every problem in hw8b must be solved using recursion. No iteration is allowed in hw8b.py (no while or for loops, no itertools, etc).
 
You may (and in some cases really should) use helper functions. You may not use "for" or "while". Some of these are the break-down-into-smaller-problems kind of problems, others are the count-up sort.
 
For longestSubpalindrome, as we discussed in lecture, you will want to test every possible substring -- you may wish to think about how you would solve this iteratively, and adapt that to a recursive solution.
 
As usual, you may not use strings in numeric problems (like nthLeftTruncatablePrime).
 
In your recursion problems, you may have stack overflow exceptions after a depth of 50-100 or so. This means your solutions may work for small n, but not for even moderately large n. For example, nthLeftTruncatablePrime(n) may fail around n=51 or so. That is ok for this hw. We'll discuss a workaround for this problem next week.
 
Good luck.  And...  Carpe diem.
 
David

Special make-up CA-led mini-lecture, Sunday, 8am (rsvp to aoneill today if interested)
Hi all.  Some of you missed all the CA-led optional talks this past week, and so will lose points on hw8.  That is, unless you attend the last-chance special make-up CA-led mini-lecture, tomorrow (Sunday) morning, 8am.  Led by Alex (thanks, Alex!!!).
 
We had to pick a time that would not have time conflicts for pretty much anyone.  This felt right.
 
One thing:  you have to email Alex (aoneill) tonight if you plan to attend tomorrow morning.  The talk will only happen if he gets at least one such email tonight.  And then, if you email him, you really must attend and be on time (mostly as a matter of common courtesy).
 
As for topic, it's looking like it will be 1-and-or-2-player AI, or perhaps some other AI-related topic.   In any case, it should be fun and interesting and educational and points-worthy.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw8 updated release (now with recursion!)
Hi all.  I'll get the formal writeup out tomorrow morning, but here is the rest of hw8, except for the bonus.
 
* CSV vs CVS
Note that there was a repeated typo in the hw8a pre-release, where the letters were in the order CVS (as in the pharmacy) rather than CSV (as in comma-separated values).  This has been fixed.  Of course, you should use CSV in your hw8a submission.  Sorry for the confusion.
 
* CA-led optional lectures
Attending one of these is also a required part of hw8a, as noted in a previous piazza post.
 
* Frogger simplifications
Really, we want you to keep Frogger simple.  For instance, you may keep your intersection tests really simple, so for example, if the frog is a circle and the log is a rectangle, then you don't need to do circle-rectangle collision stuff but instead can stick with rectangle-rectangle or even point-rectangle (using the center of the frog) collision if you wish (which you should).
 
* hw8b
Hw8b contains the recursion problems.  You will submit those in a separate Python file, hw8b.py.  In that file, of course, you may not use "while" or "for", nor have imports, etc.  Just stick with simple arithmetic (+,-,*,/,%), "if" statements, and recursion.
 
* Recursion problems
And here are the hw8b recursion problems.  They are from earlier non-recursion hw's from f14, only here you must only use recursion (no loops).
  * from f14-hw2:
      * nthLeftTruncatablePrime [autograded]
      * carrylessAdd [autograded]
      * longestDigitRun [autograded]
   * from f14-hw4:
      * longestSubpalindrome [autograded]
 
* Recursion hints
You may (and in some cases really should) use helper functions.  You may not use ?for? or ?while?.   Some of these are the break-down-into-smaller-problems kind of problems, either are the count-up sort.  For longestSubpalindrome, as we discussed in lecture, you will want to test every possible substring ? you may wish to think about how you would solve this iteratively, and adapt that to a recursive solution.
 
* Bonus et cetera
These will be posted tomorrow morning.
 
Enjoy!  And... Carpe diem!!!!
 
David

Reminder about SOLO hw policy
Hi all.  So we're all on the same page:  Tetris was a special one-time deal.  We are back to our traditional SOLO hw's now.  And that means (as per the syllabus):
 
############################################################
 
Solo Homework Policy:

Unless otherwise noted, for Solo homework assignments, students are encouraged to talk to each other, to the course staff, or to anyone else about the assignments. This assistance, though, is limited to the discussion of the problems in general. Each student must develop his or her own solutions to the homework. Consulting another student's solution is prohibited, and submitted solutions may not be copied in whole or in part from any source. 

Specifically: do not look at other students' code or written answers, and do not show them your code or written answers, until after the assignment deadline has passed and the assignment has been submitted and graded. 

And: do not email or otherwise electronically or physically transfer your code to other students, and do not receive such transmissions from other students, until after the assignment deadline has passed and the assignment has been submitted and graded. 

In particular, this precludes students helping each other debug their code (since you may not even look at their code). Of course, students may (and should!) seek debugging assistance (and any other help) from the course staff, who provide extensive support to all students via email, office hours, review sessions, and 1-on-1 tutoring by appointment. 

Also, if you find a reference (say, in an optional textbook or some online source) that contains code or a written solution that is identical or overtly similar to an assigned problem, then you are required to not look at that code or written solution! You may still refer to supporting figures and explanatory text, but you may not look at or copy the code. 
 
############################################################
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw8 pre-release
Hi all.  Wednesday is hw pre-release day, so here you go!  Note that hw8 is due Monday.
 
This is not all of hw8, but it's plenty enough to get you started, if you want to do that now.
 
Of course, before you get started, you should carefully review the code in the OOP notes, and then be sure you can write the Struct class from scratch (say, starting from the testStructClass code).
 
With that said, here you go:
 
1) 5-to-10-minute TP meetings [manually graded]
See f14-hw8-#1 for details.  These will be 5 minutes, but may expand to 10 minutes at your CA's discretion.
 
2) csvToObjects(csv) [autograded] 
Write the function csvToObjects(csv) that takes a single string of comma-separated data (as would be saved, say, by a spreadsheet like Excel if you save-as into CSV format), and returns a list of objects (instances of the Struct class) where each object corresponds to a row of data, and values for that row are stored in attributes corresponding to the column labels (which are in the first row of the data).  This is less confusing than it sounds, and a test function should clear up any confusions, so look this over carefully:
 
def testCsvToObjects():
    print "Testing csvToObjects()...",
    csv = """
name,age,gpa
fred,18,3.6
wilma,19,3.8"""
    data = csvToObjects(csv)
    assert(len(data) == 2)
    fred = data[0]
    wilma = data[1]
    assert(fred.name == "fred")
    assert(fred.age == 18)
    assert(fred.gpa == 3.6)
    assert(wilma.name == "wilma")
    assert(wilma.age == 19)
    assert(wilma.gpa == 3.8)
    print "passed!"
 
3) objectsToCsv(data) [autograded] 
Write the function objectsToCsv(objects) that basically works like csvToObjects, only in reverse.  That is, it takes a list of objects (which you may assume are all instances of Structs, and all have the same attributes, though with different values), and returns a CSV string, formatted as described above.  One thing: the column labels must be alphabetized (check out the example below for details).  Again, a test function is invaluable here, so:
 
def testObjectsToCsv():
    print "Testing objectsToCsv()...",
    data = [Struct(name="fred", age=18, gpa=3.6),
            Struct(name="wilma", age=19, gpa=3.8)]
    csv = objectsToCsv(data)
    # note that expected csv must have labels in alphabetical order
    expectedCsv = """
age,gpa,name
18,3.6,fred
19,3.8,wilma"""
    assert(csv == expectedCsv)
    print "passed!"
 
4) OOPy Frogger  [manually graded]
Write the function playOopyFrogger() that takes no parameters and runs an interactive game of Frogger (see here for details).  Actually, your Frogger should be quite simplified:  you only need cars (two kinds, that run at different speeds), trucks that are slower than cars, logs of different lengths, and turtles, and each can be drawn with only rectangles or ovals (where each type gets its own unique combination of shape and color, so, say, all the turtles are red circles).  You need to use instances of these classes:  SlowCar, FastCar, Truck, Log, Turtle (the details of these classes are left for you to decide).  Your game must also use our class-based animation, so it must create a class that extends eventBasedAnimation.Animation, as in this week?s notes.  Many design decisions are left to you.  Have fun and be creative, but do not go crazy with this -- it is just one part of one hw.  The focus is on OOP more than graphics and great gameplay, so keep it simple, but still make sure that basic gameplay works (so there is a score, a timer, some number of remaining lives, and a hi score, all as in the screenshot at the top of the Wikipedia page).  Again, keep your graphics very simple.  And have fun!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
 
One way to get opencv and other modules installed (Canopy)
Hi all.  As some of you are learning, it can be a real pain to get modules installed.  Yes, just installing them, never mind actually using them, can be quite tedious. Sigh.
 
You can (and perhaps should) try to follow the instructions that come with the various modules you need (if any, since you do not need to use modules at all -- we'll get plenty of wonderful term projects that only use Tkinter).
 
But if you want to play with a module, and you can't get it installed, here is one way that seems to work well for many modules:  you can try using Canopy.  Canopy is not a different Python, but rather a different packaging of the Python we know and love.  And it comes with a whole bunch of modules pre-installed, and a "package manager" that makes it easy to install many other modules (including opencv).

Canopy also comes with an editor/IDE to replace IDLE.  Some folks love it, some hate it.  You can configure Sublime to work with Canopy if you wish.
 
To install Canopy, first you need to sign up for an academic license here.  Then, once you get the email confirmation, you should download and install Canopy, install it, and run it.  Then run the Canopy package manage, find opencv, and install that.  Then exit Canopy and relaunch it.  At that point, you should be able to type in "import cv" and it should succeed.
 
Note that installation issues can rarely be diagnosed remotely, so if you have issues, please don't post here, but rather take them to OH so we can best help you.
 
Good luck with it!

David

Code from class today
Hi all.  The updated notes and all will be available tomorrow.  For those wishing to get a jump on studying today's material, though, here is the code we covered:
 
######################################################
# Structs
######################################################

# Here we use 'struct' in the classic sense:
#   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Struct_%28C_programming_language%29

# Note that this is not the same as Python's struct module:
#   https://docs.python.org/2/library/struct.html

class Struct(object):
    def __init__(self, **kwargs):
        self.__dict__.update(kwargs)

    def __repr__(self):
        d = self.__dict__
        results = [self.__class__.__name__ + "("]
        for key in sorted(d.keys()):
            if (len(results) > 1): results.append(", ")
            results.append(key + "=" + repr(d[key]))
        results.append(")")
        return "".join(results)

    def __eq__(self, other):
        return self.__dict__ == other.__dict__

    def __hash__(self):
        return hash(repr(self)) # inefficient but simple

def testStructClass():
    print "Testing Struct class...",

    obj = Struct()
    obj.x = 42
    assert(obj.x == 42)

    obj = Struct(x=2, b=True, s="abc")
    assert((obj.x == 2) and (obj.b == True) and (obj.s == 'abc'))
    obj.x = 3
    assert(obj.x == 3)
    assert(str(obj) == "Struct(b=True, s='abc', x=3)") # alphabetical keys
    assert(str([obj]) == "[Struct(b=True, s='abc', x=3)]")

    obj2 = eval(repr(obj))
    assert(obj == obj2)
    assert(obj is not obj2) # they are equal, but not aliases

    s = set()
    assert(obj not in s)
    s.add(obj)
    assert(obj in s)
    assert(obj2 in s)       # since (obj == obj2)
    obj.x += 1              # obj is mutable, which is bad, because...
    assert(obj not in s)    # sigh...

    class Person(Struct): pass
    joe = Person(name="Joe", age=42)
    assert(str(joe) == "Person(age=42, name='Joe')")
    print "Passed!"

testStructClass()
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Did I mention the free Jimmy John's? :-)
Hi all.  The C# event starts in 15 minutes.  And the room is starting to smell really good from all those Jimmy Johns hot subs in here!  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Optional CA Review Form (last call, due today!)
Hi again.  We are not quite at 1 review per student, which is our goal, and this is the final call.  We sure do need all the feedback from you that we can get.  It helps us make this course better for you during this semester, and also better for future 15-112 students in future semesters.
 
                                        Your input matters!!!!
 
Even if you don't have strong feelings pro or con, we would love to hear from you, to be sure we are getting a balanced and richly representative view from our students' perspective.
  
Please fill out this form today, once per CA you wish to review.
 
Again, here are the staff photos:
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112/staff-photos/staff-photos.html
 
And, once more:  your feedback is invaluable.  
 
Thanks again, and...  Carpe diem.
 
David

Reminder: Optional Microsoft C# workshop starts at 6pm tonight
Hi all.  That's 2 hours from now!  See @2672 for details.  Also, see @2675 for the software you should pre-install first if you can.
 
Have fun!!!

David

Software to install before attending tonight's Microsoft C# Workshop
Hi all.  Sorry, I should have included this in the previous post (@2672) on tonight's optional Microsoft-led C# Workshop.
 
For those of you who have Windows laptops, please install this software first:
 
* Visual Studio 2013 Community Edition update 4 (here)
 
and
 
* Kinect SDK 2.0 (here)
 
You most certainly may attend if you do not have a Windows laptop.  We'll just form groups and you can work with someone who does have one.  Plus, we have a few to lend out as well.  No problem.
 
Thanks.  And... Carpe diem.
 
David

CA-led semi-optional lectures (attend one or more of these this week)
Hi again.  This week we also start our CA-led semi-optional lectures.  Note that as part of hw8, you must attend at least one of these (we'll take attendance, so there's nothing you need to submit as part of hw8 for this).  While you only have to attend one session, you may optionally attend as many as you wish.  There are some really interesting topics here, so enjoy!!!!  And the CA's will lead a bunch more of these lectures in the coming weeks.  Great stuff (and thanks, CA's)!
 
Here are the lectures topics and times.  Note that these will be in WEH 7500 unless otherwise noted:
 
Tuesday 8pm-9pm: Image Manipulation (analyzing images)
Tuesday 9pm-10pm: pygame (a powerful Python game platform)
Wednesday 6pm-7pm: 1-player AI (playing games like 15-puzzle, sudoku, etc)
Wednesday 7pm-8pm: 2-player AI (playing games like chess, checkers, othello, etc)
Wednesday 8pm-9pm: OpenCV (using webcams)
Thursday 7pm-8pm: OpenCV (repeat) in DH 2210
For those who have university-approved conflicts with every single one of these timeslots, you need to contact me directly, listing each conflict, in order to be excused from the hw8 requirement.
Carpe diem.
David

OH and evening sessions this week
Hi again.  In light of the previous posts, and the fact that we do not have an outstanding hw to review nor a quiz this week to prep for, there are not usual Tue-night or Wed-night sessions.  Instead, those times are being used for CA-led sessions (@2673).
 
Note that the Thursday-night hw8-prep session will be from 8-10pm in WEH 7500 as usual.
 
Also, OH starts up tonight, however:  for tonight and tomorrow night, we will have light coverage, and if the queue is empty for 10 minutes, the CA's will leave.  With that said, tonight and tomorrow night are excellent times for you to get to OH and get some help with the week 1-8 material, or to talk about your term projects, etc.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Microsoft C# Workshop (tonight, 6pm) and Kinect Workshop (Sunday)
Hi all.  This is optional but highly encouraged.  The first part of this is tonight at 6pm.
 
We are very fortunate that Microsoft is sending engineers (including Andre Sutanto, former 15-112 Head CA!) to CMU specifically to train 15-112 students on how to create Kinect 2.0 games.  These are the motion-sensing devices that make it remarkably easy to make fairly sophisticated games that use hand and body gestures for their input.  They also are providing a bunch of Kinect 2.0 devices to facilitate this workshop.  Cool!
 
The workshop has two parts:  Part 1 is tonight, 6pm to perhaps 9pm, in Rashid Auditorium (GHC 4th floor near the Forbes Ave entrance).  Tonight, they will cover C#, from the perspective of a 15-112 student (so they may re-solve some 15-112 hw's, but using C# instead of Python).  Great stuff.
 
Part 2 is Sunday, 1-6pm, also in Rashid Auditorium, where they will teach you how to use C# to create Kinect games.  Excellent!
 
While no Kinects will be used tonight, it's really important to attend tonight's session to get the foundations in place for Sunday's Kinect Workshop (for those who plan to attend, which we hope includes many of you).
 
Also: to allow as many of you as possible to attend, we will move this week's hw to Monday rather than Sunday night.
 
Again, this is optional, but it is also an exciting opportunity to get Microsoft-lead exposure to a new language (C#) and a powerful platform (Kinect / XBox).  We encourage you to attend.

Carpe diem.
 
David

Official course startup (welcome back!!!)
Hi all.  I hope you had a wonderful, fun, recuperative spring break!  And now we are officially back in business.

This week has some special events, starting today, that you need to know about.
 
The next several posts are really important for you to read, so please do so.  Don't miss out on the fun!  :-)
 
Welcome back!

And...  Carpe diem!

David

Official course shutdown (Happy spring break!!!)
Hi again.  This is the last post for a while.  This is to confirm that the course is now officially shutdown until the morning of Monday March 15th (9 days from now!).
 
In that time, please do not post to piazza, and please do not email your CA's.  Everyone is on a very well-earned holiday.
 
Actually, not quite everyone.  If you have any urgent course-related matters or concerns in that time, please email them directly to me or to Prof Andersen.   Please keep all non-urgent matters on hold until we restart the course.  Thanks!
 
I will post back here when we are back up and running.
 
Meanwhile:  congratulations on your truly wonderful accomplishments over the past 8 weeks.  You have worked long and hard, and your excellent Tetris and Solitaire projects, backed up by your strong midterm scores, prove that you have made tremendous strides in that time.  Kudos!!!!
 
We are halfway done.  We still have a lot of hard work ahead of us.  But you know you can do it!  What's more, much of the work ahead is a term project of your own invention.  Totally cool!  Hopefully good fun, too!
 
But that's all ahead of us.
 
For the next 9 days, get yourself spiritually far from here.  Get yourself physically, spiritually, and intellectually recharged for the next half-semester.
 
It's been a great pleasure teaching you so far, and yet I know the best lies ahead.  I'm looking forward to it.
 
Alas, enough...  Enjoy your spring break.  Have fun.  Be safe.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Mid-semester grades
Hi all.  All grades for all hw's, quizzes, and midterms are now in autolab, so your current overall course average will be used to determine your mid-semester grades.  Prof Andersen and I will review a few edge cases this weekend and then enter your grades by Monday, and they should be available via SIO soon after that.
 
Note that grading errors (uncommon as they are) sometimes do not get detected or corrected in time to be reflected in your reported mid-semester grades.  Don't worry, just let us know the usual way (contact Anqi, acong) and we'll get them fixed asap.  And we'll be certain the semester grades are entered only after all such issues are fully resolved.
 
And, how were the results? So far, so good!  Exactly 33% of you earned an A at mid-semester!  Rock-solid!  And another 35% earned a B.  And 87% earned a C or higher.  Good job!
 
If you prefer graphical visualizations, here you go:
 

 
Now with 87% scoring C or higher, that still leaves 13% scoring D or lower.  And we are extremely committed to helping anyone in that group to be more effective, and in particular to find a pathway to a C-or-higher grade in this course.  If you have a D or an R at this time, once you get back to campus, you should meet right away with your CA's and also with your professor, and we will all form a plan to get you where you want to be in this course.  You can do it!  Also, don't forget about AMG.  You really can do it!  But the plan must start from the day you get back.  We're here to help.  Let's make it happen!!!
 
Nice work, folks.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Optional CA Review Form -- second call (we sure do need your reviews!)
Hi all.  Thanks to those who have already filled out the CA review form.  But:  that's less than half of you.
 
And..  To get a balanced view, we really, really need feedback from all of you!  So...
 
Please fill out this form today, once per CA you wish to review.
 
Again, here are the staff photos:
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112/staff-photos/staff-photos.html
 
And, again:  your feedback is invaluable.  
 
Thanks again, and...  Carpe diem.
 
David

Midterm1 grades
Hi all.  Thanks to the herculean efforts of our amazing CA's, a mere 8 hours after the last of you finished taking midterm1, they are now graded.  Woohoo!  And thanks, CA's!!!!

And...  The results were darn good!  The raw median is 78.4.  This is the highest raw median on midterm1 in recent memory.  Excellent!!!!
 
We added +3.6 points to everyone's score, so the adjusted median is exactly 82.  Autolab has your adjusted score, as always.
 
(Also, the top adjusted score is 104.6.  Fantastic!!!)
 
We are almost done with hw6 and hw7 grading, too (sorry for the delay -- the midterm had to take precedence).  We'll have those grades in "very soon".  I'll post when that is done, probably sometime tomorrow.
 
I hope you all are already well into your spring break.   Have fun, and be safe!

Carpe diem.
 
David
 
Optional CA Review Form (please fill these out today!) (thanks!)
Hi all.  As we approach mid-semester, you have two more tasks, one required, one strongly encouraged:  Take today's midterm (and good luck!), and then, please fill out some optional CA review forms!  (Of course, the CA's have yet another task, namely grading the exams, and then they, too, get to go on spring break!)
 
This form is entirely optional. Please fill it out once for each CA you wish to review. We very much value your helpful feedback. Please do state your mind, but also please keep your comments constructive.
 
Also: since some CA's have very similar names, please be sure that you are reviewing the right CA, and so please check out the CA pictures online here:
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112/staff-photos/staff-photos.html
 
Your feedback is invaluable, and we definite do take it to heart, so that we can give you the best possible learning experience.
 
Again, here is a link to the form.
 
Thanks again, and good luck today!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

9 last-minute links that are *guaranteed* to improve your midterm score!
Hi all.  Here you go:
 
http://bit.ly/1Eo4jtp
http://bit.ly/1w5rWWc
http://bit.ly/1zZmAZ1
http://bit.ly/1EOT6CC
http://bit.ly/1NiDUkY
http://bit.ly/1wIYAxx
http://bit.ly/1wIYB4A
http://bit.ly/1DXkA7m
http://bit.ly/18RZSMc
 
Carpe noctem!
 
David

Some notes about tomorrow's midterm exam (required reading)
 
Hi all.  This is some required reading about tomorrow?s midterm exam.  Please read all of it carefully.
 
* Front matter
Here is all the front matter (bulleted items on the cover sheet) for the exam.  Please read them now:
? You may not use any books, notes, or electronic devices during this exam.
? You may not ask questions about the exam except for language clarifications.
? Show your work on the exam (not scratch paper) to receive credit.
? If you use scratch paper, you must submit it with your andrew id on it, and we will ignore it.
? All code samples run without crashing. Assume any imports are already included as required.
? #5 is optional. You may skip it if you wish without penalty.
 
* Optional question #5
As the front matter says, one of the questions (#5) is optional!  It?s an easier question, actually, but we made it optional to be more sure you don?t run out of time.  Here is a note at the top of the question:  ?Note: This is the note we posted to piazza before the exam regarding the optional problem. This problem is optional. If you do it, and score over 5/10 on it, then it counts. But you may skip it entirely, making your raw score out of 90, which will be multiplied by 100/90 so your overall score remains out of 100 either way. We suggest you skip it now and return to it later if you have time.?
 
* Only #5 is optional! 
Except for the bonus (of course), everything is required except for question #5.  :-)
 
* Attend your assigned lecture!
We do not have nearly enough seats for everyone to attend just one lecture, and so:  you must attend your assigned lecture, unless you have pre-arranged permission from Prof Andersen or from me.  That approval must be in email, not just verbal permission, and you should bring a physical copy of that email to the exam.
 
* Be on time!  Even a bit early!
The exam takes 80 minutes and it starts precisely at 10:30am (morning lecture) or 3pm (afternoon lecture).  If you are late, you may have to wait outside for a few minutes until we can let you in quietly without disrupting those who are on time and already taking the exam.  So don?t be late.  Be on time.  Even arrive a bit early!
 
* Extra-time logistics
Those of you who pre-qualify through Larry Powell?s office for extra time must arrange with them for proctoring the exam if you want extra time.  You may take the exam at your normal assigned lecture time, but then you will not get extra time.
 
* Don?t panic!
While studying a bit today is a fine idea, especially say attending the optional review sessions, don?t go overboard and don?t get yourself overly stressed.  That will only be counterproductive, of course.  You?ve been working very hard for nearly two months now (and kudos for that!).  After so much time and effort, there is precious little you can do in a few extra hours that will make much (if any) difference in what you know or how you will perform on the exam.  This is a good thing.  It relieves you of the pressure to study super hard today.  That makes no sense.  So don?t do it.  You?ll be fine.  Just study a bit, then chill with some friends, and?
 
* Get enough sleep tonight!
The best way to ruin your two months of hard work is to stay up super late tonight studying (or not studying -- it's the not sleeping that's the problem).  Ugh.  Awful.  Don?t do it.  Get your sleep.  Lots of it.  Really.
 
* Really, don?t panic!
While the exam is indeed worth more than the quizzes, remember that the lower of your two midterms is worth only about 7% of your semester grade.  So a 10-point swing on this exam could be worth as little as 0.7%, which really is just not that much.  Not enough to panic over.  Plus, if you are a candidate for the AMG plan, you can actually still secure a C at the semester no matter what grade you get on midterm1.  Really.  So?  You?ll be fine.  Really.
 
* Good luck!
Luck favors a prepared mind, and by gosh are you collectively well-prepared for tomorrow.  Good luck!!!
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

Hey, everyone: go to Prof Andersen's OH today! Really!!!!
Hi all.

Helpful hint #739: The last faculty OH before the midterm is today, 3-5pm, in Prof Andersen's office, GHC 9109.
 
You all should go there!
 
I'm not sure how you'll all fit in his office, but you're all clever, I'm sure you'll figure it out.  :-)
 
To get there:  just take the GHC elevator as high as it can go.  Then wander towards the sounds of 112-isms ("Tetris!", "wordSearch!", "aliases!", "ugggghttthpt!").
 
Have fun!!!!
 
David

Practice Material from in-lecture review and review sessions
Here's the material that has been used during the in-lecture review, the week 1-4 and week 5-7 review sessions. You can use this material for additional practice problems. 
 
Please note that the in-lecture-review material posted here does not include the sudoku eventBasedAnimation or the step animation we went over. 
 
As mentioned earlier, these problems were compiled by CAs who didn't look at the real exam. We will also not post solutions to any of these problems, but feel free to ask any of the CAs for help.
 
Enjoy! 
 
My OH today: 1-3pm
Sorry for the late notice, but I need to shift my OH back one hour today.

See some of you soon.
 
David

hw7 due tonight (grace days not recommended) (and a note on the hw7 solution session)
Hi all.  Please note:  hw7 is lighter than usual, with much of it graded by effort rather than by correctness. So it's not the ideal use of a grace day, though that's your decision.
 
That said: as per @2373, the optional hw7 solution session is Tuesday at 4:30pm.  As with all solution sessions, and as is patently obvious, you may not submit the hw after you attend the session (or after you talk to anyone who attended the session).
 
So your best bet is to submit by tonight's deadline, and by tomorrow 10pm in any case.
 
Good luck with it, and good luck with all your midterm1 prep.

David

Code from optional/advanced lecture (sort of)
Hi all.  This code (ourZorkyThing.py.zip) requires a password.  It's kind of gross, and sort of toxic.  If you look at it long enough, you will need to go to an apothecary for a soothing remedy.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Hi all and welcome to 15-112!  This is the welcome email I had hoped you received last night, but unfortunately there was a glitch and apparently many of you did not receive that email.  Ugh.  I think it?s all better now (whew), but we lost an important day.  To compensate, we?ll *not* have any hw due Thursday.  Instead, all of hw1 will be due on Sunday.  I?ll rework the homework accordingly and post it later today.  Sorry for the confusion.
 
We are also spinning up the other web-based resources for the course.  Specifically,  regarding Autolab:  the link is not live yet.   It should be live within a day or so.  In any case, you do not need it to start your hw, just to submit it.  And Piazza is also being a bit stubborn, so it?s not quite configured yet, but I?m working with the Piazza team and expect that to be resolved today, too.  Finally, regarding Blackboard:  we do not use Blackboard for this course!
 
What can you do now?  Easy:
 
?         Install Python on your computer

?         Be sure you can run IDLE on your computer

?         Go through the course notes we?ve covered so far, and run the samples on your computer

 
You should all be sure to have all that done before tomorrow?s lecture.  If you get stuck, you should:

?         Attend my office hours today (1-3pm), or the CA?s office hours tonight (6-10pm in GHC 5205).

 
Even if you are not stuck, it?s great to attend those office hours.  The  more time you spend near blue hoodies, the happier and more effective you will be.  Guaranteed.
 
Finally, if you do everything above and you?re still looking for more, great!  Just keep reading ahead in the notes.  If you exhaust the notes from this semester, go to last semester. Even if we don?t cover everything exactly the same way, we?ll cover most everything mostly the same way, so it?s time well spent.  In any case, first cover the notes, and then the practice problems.  You can never do too many practice problems!!! 
 
Welcome aboard.  And?
 
Carpe diem!Hi all.  You?ll get your group assignments soon, and it?s expected that groups will hopefully meet tonight if possible and tomorrow in any case.  And there are office hours today, too, so you definitely can get started!  Also, the full hw needs some changes to the autograder, which will not be done until later tonight, when the official hw will be posted.  For all these reasons, we?ll move the hw deadline to Monday at 9pm (not 10pm).  Even so, we highly recommend that you try to finish by Sunday night.
 
Also, for those of you who wish to get a jump thinking about the hw, here is a pre-release the programming problems:Carpe diem.Hi all.  So I just peeked in on the cluster (GHC 5205), and there are some students in there working away on the hw (great job, starting early!), and there are blue-hoodied CA?s in there helping everyone.  Great!
 
The wait time right now for questions is effectively ZERO minutes.
 
Translated:  this is a fabulous time to head over to the cluster with your group and get going on the hw!
 
Do not wait until Sunday.  Or even Saturday.  Sure, you?ll probably have to put in time then.  But start today.  Now (if you can).   It?s the least-stressful, most-supported, bestest way to go about it.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Lest there be any confusion:  the same rules apply to recitation as lecture.  In particular, do not use electronics in recitation.   This includes the computers in the room.  They will suck your brain out.  They will.  But we will resist them.  We built them, we can defeat them, but only if we band together!
 
So out of respect to your CA?s, to your classmates, and ultimately to yourself, please refrain from using computers, phones, or other electronics in recitation (unless directed to do so, of course).
 
This way, you?ll be happier and you?ll learn more.  What a win-win!!!!

Thanks, and carpe diem.Hi all.  The programming part is as previously posted.  Now the manual part (?Reasoning over code?) is also there.  It is all due Monday at 9pm.
 
Be sure to work in groups.  Some of you are not doing that.  This is not optional.  You must work in groups on this assignment!

Also:  I?ve talked to a few students who are struggling a bit, and were looking for ways to be more effective.  Not one of them had attended office hours yet!  That?s BY FAR the #1 best way to start.  Go to office hours, and then go early, before the heavy loads that will predictably occur not too long from now.
 
So, here is the formula:

?         Start as early as possible.   Yesterday would have been best, but today is ok.  Tomorrow is really late to get started on this?


?         Collaborate.  Work with your groupmates!  (And do not collaborate with people outside your group, since that?s not allowed.)


?         Attend office hours.  They WILL help!


?         Spread the work out.  2-3 hours each day is way better than a mad rush at the end.  You?ll be healthier, happier, and more effective.


Good luck with it!Hi all.  So I stopped in and around the cluster for an hour last night, and it was great seeing some of you working so effectively in teams, making solid progress on hw1.  Good job!

But:  some people there were commenting that people on their teams blew off the team meeting.  That is not acceptable.  You must show more respect for your classmates.  In any case, if that won?t motivate you, maybe this will:  your grade will plummet if you do that.  As will your learning, of course.  It?s just a bad idea, not to mention not very nice.
 
So:  plan your team meetings, being as flexible as possible, and then SHOW UP.
 
Also:  if you absolutely can?t be there (or, say, you dropped the course), let your teammates know, and well ahead of time.
 
And:  if your group reduces to only 2 people, keep forging ahead, but also let your CA know.  If possible, they may merge you with another group or find some other way to increase your group size.  But you can also just do the hw with 2 people.  So just keep at it.
 
Some groups are done with the hw (and are now enjoying a low-pressure weekend that they richly deserve ? kudos!).  Some have not started (and are not?). 

CA office hours are from 2-10pm today.  Let?s make good decisions moving forward.
 
Carpe diem.Hi again.  As we finish the first week of the course, now is a fine time to reflect on whether you should consider moving to 15-110.  If you are finding hw1 challenging, no problem. But if you are finding it overwhelming, then yes, you should probably at least consider the move.  Hw1 is relatively easy compared to what lies ahead.
 
Of course, if you stay, we will do everything in our power to make this as effective and enjoyable a learning experience as possible for you.
 
But at least some of you would surely be better off by switching to 15-110 now, and then perhaps taking 15-112 in the fall.  15-110 is a fine course.  It is not ?15-112 lite?.  It covers lots of interesting topics that we do not.  And while it is not technically a programming course, it gives students a sound and gentle introduction to programming, one that most definitely lowers the learning curve in the first part of 15-112.  Here?s the final proof:  of students who have switched to 15-110 at this point, literally all of them have reported afterwards that it was a good idea.
 
And then there?s this:  while you technically have another week to decide, every day you wait is another day that 15-110 is moving ahead in a different direction without you.  So, if you are going to move, the right time to move is today!
 
Feel free to discuss this with me or with the 15-110 faculty.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  You may now use the Piazza virtual office hours to ask hw-related questions (or any other questions).
 
To do this:  go to the course website, and click on the Piazza link on the left.
 
When you post questions, please be sure to mark them as PRIVATE.  That way, our entire staff can see them, but that?s it.  This allows you to include code samples and other details in your questions that would otherwise be inappropriate to post where others could see.
 
CA?s will look to reply to Piazza posts hourly from 5pm onwards each night.  That?s the plan for now, but we?ll adjust it as we observe how it is used in practice.
 
And we do hope it is used!
 
Of course, you should first meet with your groups and really invest yourself in the homework.  You should try hard to understand the material and solve the problems.  But if with all that hard work you still are stuck, then call in the cavalry!  We are here to help!!!!

Carpe diem.Hi again.  Some groups have members who are away from CMU this weekend, attending athletic events, mock trial contests, etc.  Of course, we support students being part of athletic and academic events away from CMU.  So that?s all good. But we have to find a way to keep the learning moving along all the while!  Regarding groups in this situation, here?s the deal (as I just sent to one such student):
 
First, students who knew they would be away should have ideally met with their groups on Thursday night. Hopefully you already did that.  Regardless, you should work as closely as possible over the weekend, understanding that you may only be able to grab an hour here or there.  You may have to be proactive about finding when and where you?ll have internet, and plan accordingly.  Take the initiative and get that figured out as best you can.  And of course meet on Monday.  You need to work the issue as best you can.
 
That said, in this situation you may work semi-independently.  That?s reasonable.  Just try to be as much a part of the group as possible.
 
And? May you all shine brightly at your contests, doing yourselves and CMU proud!!!

Carpe diem!Hi all.  Here?s a batch of announcements for you.  Please read them all carefully.  Thanks, and stay warm (it?s going to get very cold tonight!).
 
1.       Hw1 due time
This was errantly entered as 9am rather than 9pm today.  That was just fixed, so you can submit now via Autolab.


2.       Submit early!
You can submit hw1 up to 7 times (that?s more than future hw?s, to give you a chance to acclimate to Autolab submissions).  Only your last submission counts (even if you had a higher score earlier).  In any case, with 7 submissions, you should not wait to submit.  Submit now! You?ll be sure you know how to submit, and that there aren?t any hiccups in the process.  You want to do this ahead of time, and not as 9pm approaches.  In particular, we do not grant extensions due to submission complicates (unless it?s truly Autolab?s fault, say due to a crashed server, but that rarely happens).


3.       Check your autograder output
When you submit, the autograder takes a little time to run, sometimes up to a minute or so later.  Refresh the page that lists your grade, and when the number includes a LINK that you can click on, then it is graded.  So?  Go ahead and click on that link!  And read the output.  Carefully.  It will report your score, and if there was a problem, it generally gives you lots of helpful information about it.  So scrutinize the output report for all the info you can squeeze from it.  Also, you should know this:  in general, the tests we supply you are not as complete as the ones used by the official autograder.  But not this week.  The two are the same (except the online autograder will enforce the no-loops/no-imports/etc restrictions).


4.       Office Hours Tonight, 6-9pm
Use your resources wisely.  It?s definitely better to work on hw in office hours!  You?re away from other distractions, and you have the CA?s there to help as they can (though sometimes they can?t respond too quickly on the night hw is due, which is a fine reason to try to finish sooner). Also, there are Piazza Virtual Office Hours from 5pm onward tonight (though there, too, you should expect slower turnaround times due to increased demand as deadlines approach).


5.       Optional Hw1 Solution Review, Tonight and Tomorrow Night
We do not email or post solutions, but we do provide them in live, in-person, interactive sessions (experience shows they are much more useful to you when presented this way).  These sessions are not required, but are really helpful.  You are strongly encouraged to attend.  Note that even if you got all of the hw correct, you still may learn a lot by seeing how a CA would go about solving the same problems.  Often, they use leaner, clearer approaches, and you will, too, if you regularly attend these sessions!  Anyhow, here are the times and locations:
    * Monday 9pm - GHC 4307

    * Tuesday 8pm - Wean 5409 
These are duplicate sessions, so you might plan to attend whichever one fits your schedule better.


6.       Boolean Arithmetic
We didn?t cover this much, and it?s a bad idea, but? You can use booleans (true/false values) in arithmetic statements.  And True will evaluate to 1, and False to 0.  So:
    print True*8
This prints 8.  It turns out that you can use this as an inelegant and ill-advised yet functional way to introduce some notion of conditional computation without using an ?if? statement.  So using boolean arithmetic is allowed in hw1.  It?s still kind of gross and should be avoided where possible.  But if you solved the problems with boolean arithmetic, you?ll get full credit.  In the future, as soon as we have conditionals (read: this coming week), you should never again use boolean arithmetic, except to demonstrate how not to write good code!


7.       Required Reading links
Some of you noticed some reading links were dead.  Whoops.  Those have been corrected.


8.       Quiz this week
We?ll take our first quiz on Thursday and/or Friday of this week.  It will cover all the core material from last week and from hw1.


9.       Instructor office hours change
Note that Kelly and I have moved our Tue/Thu office hours one-half hour back, to 5:30-6:30pm.  I also have Wednesday 1-3pm office hours still.  The online syllabus reflects these changes.


Carpe diem.Hi all.  While nearly all of you did a great job on (the relatively easy) hw1, the practice quiz in lecture today demonstrated that many of you are not prepared for Thursday?s quiz yet.  For that, you need to study (read, re-read the notes and readings) and to practice, practice, practice.
 
You are strongly recommended to attend the tutoring sessions your CA?s are hosting, and to attend office hours tonight, and also to attend the optional hw1 solution session tonight.  Yes, nothing is assigned.  That?s why it?s such a fine idea to be at office hours tonight!  You won?t be distracted by a hw, and instead you can get help on precisely the topics that are most challenging to you.
 
In any case, the only way to learn this stuff is to practice, practice, practice.  You can do the optional practice problems on the website, and finish the optional quiz we covered today, and redo problems from the hw, and check out previous semesters? quizzes and exams, and make sample problems for each other.
 
In any case, don?t trust that doing the hw alone will suffice to learn the material.  It will not!  Hw is essential, but additional studying and focused practice is also vital for success in this course.  As is smartly using your resources (office hours, tutoring, etc).
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  I apologize for the last-minute change, but I need to postpone today?s office hours.  And so I?ll extend tomorrow?s office hours and add Friday office hours as such:
                Thursday (tomorrow), 5pm to 7pm
                Friday, noon to 1pm
Meanwhile, I hope your studies for quiz1 are going well.  Plenty of CA office hours tonight, and Piazza virtual office hours, to help you prepare!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  Here they are:
 
1.       Hw2 spiral hint
So somehow when I posted the ?corrected? hint, I actually re-posted the broken one.  Sigh.  Fortunately, while my email was goofy, the actual text in the writeup was just fine.  So rather than risk contradicting that text yet again, I?ll just say this: read and follow the hint in the hw2 writeup, and make your picture look like the one in the hw2 writeup.


2.       Post code on piazza with the <pre> tags
When you use the <pre> tag for code, it formats properly.  Otherwise, we lose all the indenting, which makes the code fairly unreadable.


3.       Make all Piazza posts private
We are discussing relaxing this, but we?ve not done that yet.  So please mark your Piazza posts as private!


4.       Make all Piazza posts with code private
Even if we relax the rules for private posting, that will still definitely be required when posting code or other hw solutions or portions of solutions. When in doubt, keep it private.


5.       Respectfully use the OH queue
For really busy office hours, we are using a simple queue system, where you sign up on a sheet or whiteboard.  This has several benefits, notably that it allows us to answer questions in the order they arise (which can be tricky during the busiest times, with lots of hands always raised), and for you to know about how long (give or take) it will probably be until a CA is available, and for you to keep working all that while without keeping your hand raised.  All big wins!  The thing is: for this to work well, we all must be respectful of each other.  Please only add yourself to the queue once you have an actual question (and not in anticipation of perhaps having a question), and only add yourself once at any time.  Remember, everyone else in the queue is also a hard-working student who deserves equal respect.  Let?s be sure to keep that in mind, especially when things get really busy and deadlines are approaching.  Of course, it?s also best to try to avoid those times anyhow by finishing the hw earlier. Even so, if you are in that situation, make the best of it, which in part means to be understanding of your classmates in the same boat.


Carpe diem.Hi again.  The CA?s reported that many students last night were working alone, which should not be!  This is a group hw, and you must work in groups.  Again, while groupwork is not without its problems, on the whole it will help you learn more, learn faster, get better grades, and have more fun all the while.  So we?re going with it, for now at least.
 
So we?re all on the same page, here is an excerpt from the writeup:
 
*  This entire hw is COLLABORATIVE.  You will work in groups of up to 3 other students who are in this course this semester (and then with nobody else except current CA's and instructors).  You may not split up the work -- everyone must work on every problem.  And you may not simply copy any code but rather truly work together.
 
*  All the work for this lab should be done collaboratively, with other students in your assigned group.  Plan to spend at least 5 hours with your group before Monday night.  Also, if you need help, ask for it.  If you are in the position to offer help, please do so!
In extreme cases, such as athletes who are away all weekend, you can be creative, and use Skype or other means of remote collaboration.  However, you must inform the professor (koz) via email prior to any such team arrangements.
*  Peer effort grading:  to encourage everyone to participate appropriately, after the deadline, each of you will provide a grade on the effort of your teammates.  This is limited just to effort, so no matter how well someone understands the material, so long as they tried reasonably hard they should score 100% on this grade.  It is expected that nearly everyone will score 100% on this grade.  However, students who score too low on their effort grade will have to meet with the professor, and may have their hw grade reduced (perhaps significantly).
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  This is long, but I do ask that you read it and hopefully take it to heart.
 
Many of you are working perfectly well on hw2, and in fact 184 of you already have 30/30 in Autolab and most or all of the graphics done.  Nice job!
 
But?  Many others are not in that boat.  This is where we traditionally start seeing some poor decisions really start taking their toll on some of our students.  We?re here to help even then (absolutely!), and we?ll try to answer your questions as best we can.  But?  The best thing we can do for you, by far, is to help you make better studying decisions in the first place.  Rather than help you work your way out of the corner, why not help you avoid painting yourself into that corner in the first place?
 
Here are some of the key mistakes that combine to make students much less effective, and thus to make the hw take longer, with lower grades, less learning, and much, much more stress:
 
1.       Start late
Many students started on Wednesday, when the hw was posted, and most had started by Friday.  One of the best ways to make things really challenging is to simply wait.  Starting on Sunday, or even better, on Monday.  That will drive your anxiety through the roof!


2.       Skip the notes
The next way to make life unpleasant is to skip studying the notes or practice materials and just dive into the hw.  This way, you maximize your chances of not really understanding the material before doing the hw, which will make the hw take much longer and seem fairly undoable at times.  Ugh.


3.       Work alone
This is a very effective way to make yourself ineffective and unhappy.  You?ve been assigned groups, and in fact part of your hw grade depends on how well you work with your group.  And studies show groupwork, while not without its own problems, in general pays off handsomely:  better learning in less time with less stress.  So if you want the opposite -- worse learning in more time with more stress -- then indeed, work alone!


4.       Avoid office hours
The CA?s are awesome (they are!).  They answer questions very effectively, not giving away answers (which they don?t do), but rather helping you learn the material and understand the underlying problem, so that you can solve your own problems.  Awesome!  Also, being at office hours has the added benefit of keeping you away from other distractions, letting you focus on this hw (then you can leave office hours and focus on other things, but in any case, *focus*).  Not being at office hours is yet another solid approach for those seeking to be ineffective and unhappy!


5.       Multitask
You would not believe how incredibly efficient you can be when you turn off your phone, log out of Facebook, close your browser, turn off your mp3 player, and? focus.  So: don?t believe it!  Always try to do 20 things at once.  You?ll do them all just awfully (though, to maximize effect, you should deny this!).  And they?ll take much, much longer, too. What a great lose-lose proposition!


6.       Mistreat your body, mind, and soul
To be happy and effective, you need to tend to your whole self, including your body, your mind, and your soul.  So the corollary goes: to be unhappy and ineffective, you should neglect these things.  Here are some simple steps to do so:

a.       Get very little sleep
3-4 hours per night should do the trick.  You?ll feel miserable in no time!

 

b.      Eat poorly
Live on pizza and Pepsi.  Avoid anything with nutrients.  You know, the things your brain and body need to function well.  This is such an easy way to make yourself feel awful!


c.       Be sedentary
Moderate exercise soaks up stress, makes you feel great, and improves mental function.  But it?s so easy to convince yourself you don?t have time to exercise (when, of course, you don?t have time NOT to exercise!).  Believe the myth.  Don?t exercise.  You?ll feel worse in no time!


d.      Lose the hobbies
Playing guitar, dancing, painting, reading poetry, watching classic movies, whatever your thing is, you should all have a ?thing? or two, an escape, an indulgence, a way to transport yourself away from the stressors of daily life, and to enrich your soul.  Since this makes you so much happier and more effective when you do study, eliminating it should do the opposite.  And it shall!


e.      Avoid people
People make life richer.  They make us happier, healthier, and more effective.  This is true of our friends and family, of course, but also our classmates, CA?s, dorm mates, team mates, and even our casual acquaintances.  Of course, some people can and will have the opposite effect on you.  So it goes.  But, overall, study after study shows that the more you interact with people, the happier you will be.

 
So here?s the thing: most of you are doing most of this mostly right.  And the results speak for themselves, since most of you seem fairly happy and are being fairly effective, in this course and otherwise.
 
But?  A sizable fraction of you (perhaps 1/3rd) are mostly not doing these things.  And, worse, most in that group do not seem especially happy, and certainly are not being especially effective.  Most in that group claim they don?t have time.  They don?t have time to sleep, to eat right, to exercise, to recreate, to socialize.  They don?t have time to start early, to read the notes, to meet their groups, to be at office hours.
 
And? THEY ARE RIGHT!!!  The combined effect of these poor decisions is that everything takes much, much longer, and so, in fact, they don?t have time for anything.
 
It?s a self-perpetuating cycle.  No time for anything, so everything is at the last minute, with not very good results, and with lots of stress and anxiety.  All that makes everything take longer, robbing you of time, so the cycle perpetuates.  Ugh.
 
But it does not have to be that way.  Really.  Remember: it?s not that way for many, many students here.  They aren?t all paragons of efficiency, and they, too, make poor decisions with regularity (we are talking about college students, after all, and it?s also not like older adults get everything right, either).  But, by and large, our happier and more effective students take these issues to heart.  They tend to their whole selves.  They try to avoid the ineffective behaviors listed above.  They try to actively engage in behaviors that make them happy, healthy, and effective.  They don?t always succeed, but they succeed more than not, and that turns out to be plenty good enough.
 
You can do this, too.  Don?t convince yourself you don?t have time. You don?t have time NOT to do it.  Attend to yourself, to your health, to your happiness.  Maybe not every second of every day, but enough to keep yourself centered, balanced, and able to stay positively engaged not just in your academics but in all facets of your life.
 
We are here to help.  Yes, with your 15-112 questions.  But also with anything else that might make you happier and more effective here at CMU.  Since that is a pre-requisite for doing well in 15-112 or any other course.
 
Finally, about ?Carpe diem?. It literally means ?seize the day?. Figuratively, it means that today is the day to take action (according to your personal agenda, not anyone else?s).  If you want to make a change -- to yourself, to your community, to the world -- do something about it today.  You do not have to change everything all at once.  That?s impossible, and just plain silly.  But take some action, do something positive, something that moves you a step closer to your goals, a step closer to who you envision yourself to be.  Do that today.  Do that every day.

Carpe diem.
Hi all.  I understand how, after putting so much effort into the hw, you might want to move on to something else, how attending the hw solution sessions might not be first on your to-do list at that point.
 
Yet?  I strongly encourage you to reconsider.  Right when you finish the hw is the *perfect* time to attend the review.  It?s all fresh in your mind.  You?ll more thoroughly understand and relate to and learn from the elegant solutions that the CA?s present.  At that moment, you are much more likely to have some of that elegance sink in.  You WILL become better programmers if you attend.
 
Getting problems right is not the goal of the hw.   Understanding how to solve such problems efficiently and elegantly is the goal.  And then being able to do so over a broad class of similar problems, both for the rest of this course and then beyond, for the rest of your career.  That?s the goal.
 
And you will be amazed at how much more you will get out of the hw and out of this course if you attend the optional hw solution sessions.  Even if you scored 100% on the hw!
 
Figure this:  you put so much time into the hw.  Put in 1-2 more hours and get a multiplying effect for all that effort.  Totally worth it!!!
 
Here again are the times and locations of these sessions each week, including one tonight:
 
CA Optional Homework Solution Review Sessions:
   * Mon, 9pm, GHC 4307
   * Tue, 8pm, Wean 5409
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  The Super Bowl is over (how could the 49ers not take their shot with Kaepernick running the ball when they were knocking on the door there at the end?!?  The Ravens had no answer for that...  Sigh?), and the hw3 writeup is officially posted (though it?s exactly what was sent via email), and the hw3 autograder is live.
 
You get 5 submissions, so be sure to use them wisely.  In particular, be sure to test thoroughly before submitting, and then to carefully review the Autograder output (by clicking on your score) and to try to resolve every issue completely before resubmitting.  Rapid-fire resubmissions is almost surely not the most effective way to use those 5 submissions.
 
To quote that guru of programming pearls, Winnie the Pooh:  think, think, think!!!

Carpe diem.  And good luck with it!Hi all.  So the pseudo-starter code in Piazza uses classes, which we?ve not yet used, and which the Autograder will not let you use.  So some of your submissions have been rejected for this reason.

To remedy this, I?ve done two things:  first, the Autograder now will accept submissions using classes.  And second, you all now have an extra submission, or 6 total submissions.
 
Note that the only reason we are allowing classes is to let you use the starter code in that Piazza hint.  Please be certain not to use classes in any other way in this hw (not that you would anyhow).
 
Sorry about the confusion.Hi all.  In the short time that the autograder is posted, I?ve already received several emails about this, as students are not ?getting? a hint I sent earlier about #ignore_rest, and as a result they are scoring 0/85 on their submissions.
 
Remember:  just as in hw2.py, place ALL your graphics code below a line that says #ignore_rest.
 
If you don?t, the autograder will be unhappy, and then you?ll score 0/85, and then you?ll be unhappy.
 
Again, look at hw2.py for details.  But be sure to add an #ignore_rest line to your hw3.py file, and to place ALL your graphics (including the import line) below there.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  This probably should go without saying but:  please be sure not to resubmit a hw after attending the hw review session for that week.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  Please note that my office hours for both tomorrow and Thursday of this week have to be adjusted as follows:

Wed, 5-6pm.
Thu, 2-3pm.

Thanks.
Hi all.  A few reminders about Piazza posts:
 
?         Make them private.


?         Post code inside <pre> tags. Otherwise, it?s generally unreadable.


?         Ask precise questions.  Here are examples of what not to post:

o   ?How do I get started with this problem??

o   ?What?s wrong with this code??

o   ?Any hints on question 4??


?         Note:  If you really can?t ask a precise question, no worries, we?ll gladly help you.  Only, not on Piazza.  Those sorts of open-ended questions really require in-person help at Office Hours.

 
Carpe diem.Hi all.   Here?s an update to  get you started on hw4, and also to get you started on studying for tomorrow?s quiz.
 
You should start your quiz studies by finishing hw3, looking at the practice-thru-week3, and ? ESPECIALLY ? carefully reviewing the practice-quiz3, all posted on the course website.
 
Note that finishing hw3, and also the practice-quiz3, will both be part of hw4, so you might as well get a jump on those tonight, since they definitely will help get you ready for tomorrow?s quiz.
 
As for groups?
 
Based on your feedback, it?s clear that most of you want groups to remain, but with some changes.  Ok ,we?ll give it a try.
 
Starting today, for hw4, you have these options:
1.       [default] Work in a group selected randomly by your CA

2.       Work in a self-selected group of up to 4 total students (who may be in different recitations, though we suggest you keep it within recitations if possible)

3.       Work solo (though this option is highly discouraged)

 
I?ll send out a form (or something like that) later today where you can let us know your choice.  You?ll need to let us know by 5pm tomorrow (Thursday).  At that point, if we don?t hear from you, you?ll get the default, which is option #1.
 
Also, there will be more to hw4 than just hw3 + practice-quiz3, but that?s enough to get you started.  I?ll get the rest posted asap.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all. Please be sure to actually read these announcements.  It?s apparent that some of you are not (can you say, ?bad judgment??), and they are required reading, and often they are the only place where important and time-sensitive announcements are made.  Here are this morning?s:
 
1.       Hw3 group review survey (due by 5pm today)
Kelly sent this yesterday (thanks, Kelly). And it?s required that you all fill it out:  By 5pm today, you have to fill out this form, and thoughtfully.  It?s no fun talking about consequences for not doing the right thing, but here they are:  -25 pts on hw3 for not filling it out by tonight, and a 0 on hw3 if it?s not filled out by tomorrow night.  But that?s just silly.  Please fill out the form.  Thanks.

 

2.       Hw4 group signup (also due by 5pm today)
As noted in email yesterday, you have to sign up by 5pm today for which group option you prefer for hw4.  Here are your choices:

1. [default] Work in a group selected randomly by your CA

2. Work in a self-selected group of up to 4 total students (who may be in different recitations, though we suggest you keep it within recitations if possible)

3. Work solo (though this option is highly discouraged)
Here is the form:

   http://tinyurl.com/bgyc2bm

If you are in a group, everyone in the group must fill out their own form separately, and everyone in the group must identify the same group members.  And please double-check andrew id?s of your group partners, and do not misspell those andrew id?s in the form.  Thanks.


3.       Hw4
The first half of hw4 was posted yesterday (it was to finish hw3, and to do the practice-quiz3).  The rest will be available later today.  It is all due Sunday at 10pm.


4.       Required reading
It is obvious that many, perhaps most, of you are totally not doing the required reading.  You have simple questions like ?what does str.lower do??  This is covered in the required reading.  Which is, after all, required.  You should do it.  Really.


5.       Optional reading
For those seeking additional textbook-style coverage of the course materials, the syllabus includes several very clear, free, online textbooks just for that purpose.  I highly recommend them as an additional resource, if needed.

 

6.       8-hr hw option
I had mentioned this in class last week, and nobody was interested at the time, but since hw3 (curiously) there has been some interest.  The thought is that you could have a fixed limit of 8 hours on the hw.  It?s not quite so simple as that, and would require considerably restructuring both how hw works (with required group meeting times, for example, and hw grades based more heavily on attendance and participation) and also how the points are allocated (more emphasis on exams, less on hw?s).  But it could be feasible.  If you are interesting in being part of this experiment, please let me know.

 
7.       Medical Assistant
We have a practicing UPMC physician participating in our course, and his demanding medical responsibilities are unsurprisingly making it hard for him to work in a traditional group.  So?  I?m seeking a high-performing student currently in the course to work with him.  That student could still be in another group, this would be in addition.  I would expect you would work together both on the hw?s and also just in reviewing the material, basically as a study group.  This would require perhaps 5 hours per week of your time, and would also require that you work around his busy schedule.  Not only is this a good thing to do on its own merits, but (without any promises) this may lead to your possible further involvement in the ongoing computational medical research that our doctor friend is conducting (which is why he is in this course in the first place).  In any case, please reply today if you are interested.


8.       Dr Who and 15-112
This was sent by an astute student:Hi all.  It?s apparent that some of you are working on homework with students outside your groups.  This is disallowed, and disrupts our group-based approach.  To be very clear:  working on homework with students outside your groups is cheating.  If it comes to our attention that you are doing this, you will fail the assignment and you may fail the course and face additional consequences besides.  So don?t do it!!!

You may -- and should! -- work on the homework extensively with your group partners.  We also provide extensive supports for you in addition, including office hours, piazza virtual office hours, tutoring, and so on.
 
Plus, you may work with anyone at all on non-homework problems.  So if you have friends outside your groups and you wish to work together, just work on the practice problems.  But not the homework problems.
 
For homework, work with your groups and only with your groups, and use the ample resources we have provided, and play by the rules.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  I will be travelling to an out-of-state memorial service today (leaving in 5 minutes), and so will be offline until late tonight.  I will try to post the autograder tonight in any case.  Meanwhile, please direct questions to the CA?s and to Kelly.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Many of you did not fill out either the hw3 peer assessment or hw4 group signup forms.  I had stated that there would be penalties for that.  Instead, I want to focus on us collectively improving our performance and responsibility in all ways.  To set the right positive tone, I will defer any penalties (basically granting an amnesty) until Monday.  So if you just fill out the hw3 peer assessment forms by Sunday night, you?ll be fine.  So:  DO IT!!!
 
As for hw4 groups, those who did not fill out the form need to work directly with their CA?s to get in a group. And then be a really solid, helpful, productive group member.
 
Finally:  be sure to read your emails regularly, and to respond promptly and responsibly.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  As you know, in an effort to reduce stress in this course, we have turned to a group-based approach to the homework (along with several other changes, such as Piazza virtual office hours).  This has worked in one regard:  while not universally so, overall the stress levels are definitely, palpably lower.
 
However?  Regarding actual learning, recent trends are unpromising.  It is clear that some groups are not functioning well, and even in functional groups, many students are not properly using groups to their advantage.  The bottom line is that many of you are learning this ok-not-great, but CMU does not stand for ok-not-great, and we cannot water down our courses that way!!!
 
If we are to keep this new group-based approach, we need better learning, better outcomes, better results -- world-class learning, world-class outcomes, world-class results -- and we need them now.
 
We need you to be able to write code from scratch under quiz conditions.  Which means practicing writing code from scratch, by yourself, under quiz conditions.  And practicing that until you can do it, and do it reliably, and do it well.
 
 
We need you to thoroughly understand how to trace code, even very complex code, and how to reason over code.  Again, by yourself, under quiz conditions.
 
One way to achieve that is to have lots of SOLO homework.  It works.  We know it works.
 
However, if groups are going to work, you simply MUST find a way to get over that same bar.  We are here to help.  You bet.  But in the end it is up to you to hold yourself to that standard.

I will add an extra quiz this Tuesday (in no way as a penalty, but entirely the opposite!), which will be a repeat of quiz3 (same topics, same question types, though of course slightly modified).  I am hoping and expecting that you will all collectively rise to the challenge and begin to show me that this group-based approach can work and should be continued.
 
I believe in you.  Always have.  It?s this system that I am unsure of.  And I want you to prove to me, and far more importantly to prove to yourselves, that this ?kinder, gentler? approach can and will work.  Make it work!
 
Finally, beyond your groups, please do embrace the CA?s, as they are very much in your corner and want to help you succeed.   Go to office hours, go to tutoring sessions, meet with them, work with them, learn from them.
 
Case in point:  last night?s office hours were basically empty.  This is not the right response that 300+ students should have when they just collectively underperformed on a quiz.  No worries.  It?s history.  Starting today, right here, right now, let?s start a new and better trend.
 
I want you to succeed.  In fact, I will accept nothing less from myself, my staff, and ultimately from you than your overt success in this course.  Now, let?s all make it happen!!!

Carpe diem.Hi again.  One more thing:  those of you who have scored below your expectations, or in any case have scored below around 40 on more than one quiz very much need to get some personal tutoring from your CA?s.
 
In the past we have *required* this.  This semester, we are really trying to help you make the right decisions and use your resources wisely, but without such mandates.
 
So:  please do so.  You are not required to do so, but it is the Right Thing To Do.  So, please, do it.
 
Your CA?s very much want to help.  Give them the chance.   It will help.  You?ll learn the material faster and better.  The homeworks will take less time.  The quizzes will be less stressful, and you?ll score higher grades.  Really.  It WILL help.  So please do it.
 
Carpe diem.Dear students,
 
May the first sunrise of this Year of the Snake shine on your soul, and bring joy and harmony to your life.
 
As Hongjun Laozu rode the beast Nian, may you not just defeat your personal monsters in this year, but learn to ride atop them!  Turn your great challenges to your own advantage, and to that of the world we live in.
 
Happy New Year!Hi all.  I?m back online briefly, in an Eat?n?Park (yum, road food!) using a slowly dying battery?
 
Many have asked if you are responsible for the try/except problem.
 
YES!  I know we?ve not covered it, but it?s really straightforward:
 
try:  THIS
except: THAT

The example will run the THIS code, but if something goes wrong, like a division by zero, then it abandons the THIS code and instead runs the THAT code.  Simple enough.
 
Play with it, figure it out.  You can do it.   It?s ok to be stretched just a bit on the hw.  :-)
 
Good luck with it.Hi all.  The hw4 autograder is posted.
 
As has been noted before, we will continue to post the autograder even later in the process, eventually not posting it at all.  Consider:  in most courses, you don?t get any grading (autograder or otherwise) before you submit.  It?s all done afterwards.  We?re moving you towards that.

So what can you do?  Easy:  test, test, test!!!  Test your code so thoroughly, so wonderfully, so thoughtfully, that it passes the autograder on the first shot every time (or, if it does fail, it?s some tiny edge case that?s easy enough to quickly fix).  That is how to go about things in this course, and in your programming future as well (since then you won?t have an autograder, of course).

Carpe diem.Hi all.  Hw3 and quiz3 grades are released.
 
Note:  most of you lost basically all the style points on hw3, which is not surprising as we start grading for style.  To help ease you into it, we actually divided the style grade in half, so it was only up to a 5-point drop (and so the hw3 median was still a solid 90).  But that?s just for hw3.  Starting with hw4, style deductions can count up to 10 points.
 
You really should carefully read your style grades in the hw3 comments now, and then quickly try to get your hw4 submissions up to our style guidelines, if they aren?t already.
 
In the future, don?t look at style as something you add after-the-fact.  You should always write code with good style, so there?s never a need to ?add style? to code you?ve written.
 
Also, as for quiz3, to bring the median somewhat into a respectable place, I added 10 points to everyone?s quiz3 score (well, everyone who had a non-zero score, at least).  But quiz3 scores will be mitigated, hopefully, by your collective excellence on the upcoming quiz3b on Tuesday in class.  Let?s hope!!!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Please read and heed this important note:  your last line of your file must be blank, with no spaces and no comments.  This is particularly true in files without an #ignore_rest line.
 
If your last line is a comment, or has extra spaces, the autograder will sometimes choke on it, and you?ll score 0 points.  Ugh.
 
We?ll fix this undesirable autograder behavior, but not for hw4 and maybe not for another week or two or more, so for now and for the foreseeable future, please be sure to have a blank line (without even spaces) at the end of your submission.

Thanks.

David
 
PS: While about 140 of you haven?t submitted yet, the median score of those who have submitted is 50/50.  Plus, I?ve peeked at some of the free-response manually-graded materials at the top of the files, and that looks really solid.  Looks like many of you got a good jump starting back on Wednesday when this was first posted, and in any case many of you really did a great job!  Nice work!!  I hope the rest follow suit.  Good luck with it!Hi all.  I?m noticing a trend in the CA reports that many students are blowing off appointments with them.

This is not acceptable.  Our CA?s are fabulously dedicated, and they?ll go to great lengths to tutor you, and then at times that are convenient for you (and often inconvenient for themselves).

It?s just not acceptable for you to make an appointment and then not show up.
 
Please do continue to make appointments.  But then follow through, and be there!!!

Carpe diem.Office hours were 100% empty.  Sigh?Hi all.  Please note that my office hours for today are moved to 1-2pm tomorrow.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  As you can see by perusing past semesters, we typically offer optional lectures on Saturday afternoons on interesting, advanced topics just beyond what we can include in our core curriculum for 15-112.  Topics are generally TBD, and may change at the last minute (based on democratic vote of those in attendance).  But the list stays fairly constant semester by semester, so peek at previous semesters for details.

We?ll start this lecture series this coming Saturday (in two days).  The lecture will run from 1:30pm to 3:30pm.
 
Attendance is entirely optional, and has no bearing on your 15-112 grade.
 
However?  If you wish to attend, you need to fill out this form (so we know how large a room to reserve):
http://tinyurl.com/d6o7k9c
 
Also, if you attend, there is only one rule:  you must pay attention, take good notes, and really participate.
 
Again, this is entirely optional.  But if you do wish to participate, please fill out the form by 5pm today.
 
Thanks, and of course, carpe diem.Hi all.  So we had a good long talk last lecture about how moving to SOLO can lead to some poor judgment. And here we go.
 
I am sitting here even now viewing the solutions to this week?s hw, as posted online by a student from last semester.  Ugh.
 
And I am posting this now in the hopes of avoiding what would surely be a very unpleasant and perfectly avoidable series of events that might commence with one or more of you submitting hw5 after having viewed the same material.
 
I am also in the process of encouraging the student to remove this content, as well as exploring what other consequences might be appropriate for that student.  I will include the Dean of Student Affairs as a guide in making that determination.
 
So you know, and not speaking to this issue in particular:  there is no statute of limitations at CMU for cheating, and if a violation is discovered even long after you complete a course, your grade can be retroactively changed, even to an R, even if this means withdrawing a previously-issued diploma, even years after the offense.
 
As for this course:  if you viewed the solutions (whether the ones I am presently looking at, or any others), then you of course have violated the spirit and letter of the rules governing hw5.  In that case, you have two options:  first, you can come talk to me and we?ll discuss your situation.  Or second, you can simply not submit hw5 (so perhaps in some legalistic sense then a violation did not occur, and we?ll let the 0 on hw5 stand as its own consequence).  However, if you viewed the material, and then you submit hw5, then you will face severe consequences, even if you do not copy the material or even use it in any way beyond ?just looking?.
 
Also, as an aside:  the solutions I am now viewing are in fact quirky in a few places, such that if you copied them, no amount of changing variable names, moving functions around, adding or removing comments, none of that would help avoid discovery.  Sigh.
 
As I said in class, I am sure that upwards of 99% of you are following the rules.  I apologize to that 99% for wasting your time yet again with this nonsense.  For the other less-than-1%, I continue to urge you to be sensible, to stay within the prescribed lines, or at least to understand that the consequences for this poor judgment far outweigh any perceived benefits.
 
Don?t cheat.  It?s just not worth it.Hi all.   A few hw5 clarifications:
 
1.       Bitwise or (|)
One problem required using the bitwise-or operator (|).  You may skip that problem, but I?ll include it as a teensy bonus problem, in case you did it.


2.       Bitwise shift (<< and >>)
These you are responsible for.  Just know this:  (a << b) is the same as (a * (2**b)).  And (a >> b) is the same as (a / (2**b)).


3.       subsetSum
As this is also really bitwise, this will also be bonus.  We?ll give super-strong hints on it in today?s bonus lecture as well as in tomorrow?s reprise.


4.       hw6b?
Several have asked if this includes both hw6a and hw6b from f12.  Yes, both.


5.       manual answers in a multiline string
As with hw4, place your manual (non-autograded) answers at the top of your file in a multiline string.


6.       How to sketch a sort?
One problem has you do this, which is tough to do in a multiline string.  So just be sensible and do something we can understand that shows that you understand.  Like maybe use numbers instead of bar heights?


7.       dotProduct
If the lists have different lengths, use the shorter length, and ignore the extras.


8.       writeup and autograder
The writeup may be delayed until late today or early tomorrow (what cycles I had for that are being consumed with other course-related matters today?).  But it?s just what you?ve already been told, no surprises.  I was going to make the autograder available Monday, but by popular request, given that this is your first SOLO hw, I?ll make it available tomorrow.

 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  I just received a couple emails asking for clarifications about whom you can discuss what with on hw5.  This is surprising, but alas, I?ll clarify:
 
You may not discuss any part of hw5 with anyone, except for the course staff.
 
This is indeed a stricter sense of SOLO than the default laid out in the syllabus.  But the relevant portion of the syllabus starts out with ?unless otherwise noted?.  And here it IS otherwise noted.
 
For hw5, you may not discuss any part of it with anyone.  It?s entirely, 100% SOLO.

Except, of course, that you may discuss any part of it with the course staff.  That?s always the case.
 
So do not refer to the syllabus for clarification, since it does not apply here.  The only thing that applies is what I said in the hw5 spec, and in this clarification.
 
Work on your own.  Entirely on your own.
 
I hope this is perfectly clear.  If not, then please do contact me and I?ll see if I can?t make it even clearer.
 
One last thing:  a student was concerned about the ?enmity? he is sensing from friends who would not help him, who had previously done so on earlier hw?s.  Thing is, they are right.  Those were group-based, and that was fine.  This is SOLO, and it?s not.  Don?t ask your friends for help.  You are putting them in a bad position.  They must decline.  And then you should not sense enmity, but only them doing the right thing.
 
Carpe diem.A student just made a heartfelt plea to offer 2 more submissions, so those who used up all their submissions prior to the show-your-work email could do something about it.
 
Well, I?m not very persuaded, as it should be utterly obvious that you should show your work.

On the other hand, gosh, ok?.
 
You now have 9 submissions, which is a crazy large amount of submissions.

Cheers.Hi all.  Here is the wordSearch as we wrote it in lecture 1 today.  It?s mostly the same as the one in the notes, only with a somewhat better (if more verbose) naming scheme for the helper functions, and a different way of specifying the 8 directions, and finally a more user-friendly return value (word, start, direction).
 
Enjoy.  :-)
 
DavidHi all.  I?ve been ?drinking from the firehose? the past 2 days, and so?.  The hw cannot be posted until tomorrow, perhaps Friday (sorry for the delay).  Regardless, you?ll get 5 days as always, so it?s due Monday if posted tomorrow and Tuesday if posted Friday.
 
Also, no quiz tomorrow.  You?ll have a shortened quiz on Friday in recitation.  It will cover 1d lists and tuples.   There?s no practice quiz this week, but I recommend you look into materials from previous semesters (see the syllabus for links).  Tonight is probably the perfect night to review those materials!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.   We have another optional lecture this Saturday, 1:30pm to 3:30pm, this time in DH 1112.   Topic TBD, but maybe something involving 2d lists, we?ll see.
 
If you are interested in attending, but cannot make it then, we will have a reprise lecture.  In that case, please fill out this poll so we can select the most convenient time for everyone:
 
http://tinyurl.com/apugcl9
 
Polls close at midnight tonight.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.   Several have asked for a pre-release of hw6, so here it is.  All the problems are here, though the formal writeup may not get posted until tomorrow.  But this is plenty to get you started today.
 
Given the Thursday release, hw6 will be due Monday at 9pm.

This entire hw once again is SOLO, and in the stricter no-discussion style.  I hope to switch to half-collab/half-solo, but not yet.  I feel hw5 helped most of you A LOT, and I think we need another one or two all-SOLO before making any other changes.

Remember to place any test functions you might have, or any top-level code (that runs when the file is loaded), below the #ignore_rest line so the autograder does not run it.

1.       Do the following problems from f12 hw5a:

a.       solvesCryptarithm

b.      bestScrabbleScore


2.       Do any 6 problems of your choosing from f12 hw5b.  These are SOLO, not collaborative, despite what f12 hw5b may say.  The problems you elect not to do still make for excellent study problems for upcoming quizzes and exams.  As usual, place your solutions in a triple-quoted string at the top of your hw6.py file, and be sure to show your work!


3.       Othello

a.       Find an online Othello game and play it for a while, until you are comfortable with the rules.

b.      Study the attached code.  That code is based on what we wrote in class today (in either lecture), similar enough to understand, but there could be some small differences, so be sure to look carefully at it.  In any case, once again, you should study it thoroughly since both wordSearch and Othello are now likely to appear on upcoming quizzes and exams (and not just appear, but perhaps play a central role).

c.       Make the following changes to the code.  Do not change the names of any functions, nor the names or number of parameters those functions take.  Otherwise, the autograder will not work!

                                                               i.      Fix getMove so that it works properly up to a 26x26 board.  Right now, it fails if there are more than 9 rows.

                                                             ii.      Add the function getLegalMoves that takes a board and a player and returns a list of all the legal moves for that player as a list of (row,col) tuples, sorted first by row and then (for the same row) by column.  If there are no legal moves for that player, return the empty list.

                                                            iii.      Change printBoard to display legal moves as a dot (?.?) rather than a dash (?-?).

                                                           iv.      Change the game (again, without changing any function names or parameter lists) so that it works with wraparound, so for example, if you head off the board on the right edge, you re-enter on the left edge.  Wraparound must work across all 4 edges (left, right, top, bottom), and then in all 8 directions.

                                                             v.      Modify playOthello so that it displays the current score as the game is played (the score for each player is the total number of pieces that player has on the board at that time).

                                                           vi.      Add the function playOthelloAgainstRandomComputer(rows, cols), that works just like the just-modified playOthello, only player O is the computer, which makes random moves from among the legal moves available to it.


4.       The Memory Game
In this game, an RxC rectangular grid is filled with random numbers such that each integer from 1 to RC/2 occurs exactly twice.  Numbers are hidden.  On each turn, the player uncovers two numbers.  If they match, they are unhidden (so the player can see them).  Play ends when all the numbers are unhidden.  The score depends both on the number of incorrect guesses and the total time required.  Write the function playMemoryGame(rows, cols) that implements this game as described.  Follow this spec when you can, but there are also a lot of decisions left up to you.  In any case, make your game reasonably attractive and playable, though we understand that console-based games have their limitations.  Also, include a ?help? command that explains how to enter commands.

 
That?s it!  Have fun!!!Hi all.  Attendance is required, as noted in the syllabus.  This stuff is hard enough to learn if you are there, paying attention, trying to learn it!  And so, when attendance was too lean yesterday, we had an attendance quiz.  As expected, I?ve received a flood of emails from students who were not there explaining why I should give them some special consideration.  Rather than respond to each of those requests individually, I will respond to all of them collectively here.  And, out of my genuine concern for all of you (truly!), the answer is:  sorry, but no, except for the usual exceptions (medical situations requiring visits to health services or other medical providers, campus-approved athletic or academic trips, etc).  Everyone who missed the quiz will lose the points, including those registered in lecture 1 who missed lecture 1?s quiz (at 10:30) and then attended lecture 2?s quiz (at noon).
 
I understand that many of you think you have very good reasons to miss lecture.  You may, or at least you may think so.  But then you will have to absorb the consequences.
 
This is in no way to be harsh.  Really.  It?s to help you make better decisions.  Much of this course, along with our sibling courses in other disciplines (such as 18-100, or 21-127, etc), is designed and implemented to help our mostly-freshmen population be best-prepared for the increasingly intense courses that lie ahead for most of you.  Part of that requires that we help you acquire a firm understanding of a large amount of challenging material.  But part of it further requires that we help you adopt effective study habits and learning strategies (and even life strategies, such as sleeping right, eating right, exercising and socializing regularly, etc).  Regularly attending class is definitely part of that package.
 
Some of you have argued that you were just 10 minutes late, and that?s not a big deal.  I?ve received basically the same requests each week as the hw deadline passes.  ?I was just 2 minutes late, and it?s unfair to lose 25 points for that.?  That?s a real quote.  And it?s misguided.  First, it?s perfectly fair, since fairness requires that everyone is subjected to the same rules, which of course is the case.  So the writer meant ?unreasonable? not ?unfair?.  Second, it?s entirely reasonable!  In fact, it would be unreasonable not to lose those points!  Why?  Because that?s the way the world works.  Deadlines are just that.  Deadlines.  You have to meet them.  In the real world, you don?t lose 25 points.  You just lose.  Whatever it was you were trying for, you don?t get it.  You?re out.  That?s a real deadline.  Here, in not-quite-real-world academia, we soften the blow for you.  There are incremental consequences.  This is so you can learn over time to really hit real deadlines.
 
Our graduates pursue the most demanding jobs.  Jobs that are full of exciting tasks, the kind that have large impacts across society, the kind that pay a lot and demand a lot.  And with those jobs come many responsibilities.  Just one of those responsibilities is that you get your work done right and done ON TIME.  Nobody is going to pay you $100k for you to be late, and nobody will want to hear why you are late, and nobody will think that 2 minutes late is ok.  It?s not!
 
This is not yet the real world.  It?s the training grounds.  So we do have those incremental consequences.  But it is absolutely essential for you and your life goals that we maintain those standards.  So we shall.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  I?ll have some office hours today from 1:30-2:30.
 
Some people have asked if they need an appointment for office hours.  Once again, no, you do not!  Just stop by, the door is open, come on in.  It?s your time, reserved for you to discuss whatever is on your minds.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Friday quizzes are spaced out in time, occurring all day.  So some students have finished the quiz before others have started.  And so:  for obvious reasons, it is essential that nobody discuss the quiz at all until everyone finishes.  This means no comments to anyone, nothing, nada, zilch.  Not until 5:30pm today.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  To be clear:  an ?attendance quiz? is not a quiz at all.  It?s just taking attendance.
 
So we did not have a quiz yesterday, just as announced.  It?s just taking attendance.
 
The syllabus makes it abundantly clear that attendance is required.  If you do not attend, you will lose points now and then.   Like yesterday.  That?s not a quiz, it?s just taking attendance.
 
If you need further clarification on this issue, feel free to let me know.Hi all.  Sorry for the late notice, but I have to tend to some family matters, so I unfortunately cannot host OH today nor the bonus lecture tomorrow.Hi all.  Please note:
 
For one of the hw problems, you will have to change printBoard to take one additional parameter, currentPlayer.
 
Also, a hint: don?t try to permute the letters in the hand for scrabble.  Why not?  Hmmm?..
 
Finally:  I?m receiving some concerns about homework duration.  You get 5 days, every time.  Not 5*24==120 hours, but about 5 days, and always 5 full evenings.  This is how it has worked (and worked well) for years.  Giving more time is hardly helpful for at least two reasons. First, students do not use that extra time (as evidenced by literally empty office hours on those extra days, for example).  Second, we cover material later in the week that is required for the hw.  Starting it before then is literally counter-productive.  We could respond by moving the hw due day back into the middle of the week, but we cannot do that, since we are a very large course and our due days are coordinated with other large courses.  We are assigned Sunday night, with a slide to Monday night as needed, and that?s that.  This works best in coordination with 15-122, 15-150, 15-213, 15-210, 18-100, 21-127, and several other courses.  It?s just the hand we are dealt, and we try to make the best of it.
 
In the end, lots of professors, deans, and senior staff members, along with the input of literally hundreds and hundreds of students, have thought long and hard about the homework schedule.  We have experimented over the years with various models.  And this one works the best for the most people.  If you are not among those for whom it is ideal, or if you at least think that?s the case, well, sorry, but this definitely is the best model for the most people.Hi all.  Note that we?ll only check for cases up to 26x26 for the memory game, so you don?t need to deal with column AA.
Hi all.  From the high quantity and very high quality of questions on Piazza, it?s clear that many of you are doing a great job so far on hw6.  Kudos!!!
 
A few things:
 
?         Odd style
In general, you are responsible for the style in everything you submit, including code written in class or on the course website.  This means, yes, you?d have to neaten it up at times.  However, since this was not exactly consistently stated this go-round, we?ll relax that for just this hw.  You do not have to change any code we provided to you just for style?s sake.  We will only grade code you write or modify for style.  This includes not having to write test functions for the functions we provided.


?         Odd dimensions
A number of people have asked what to do with an odd # of cells in the memory game (say, a 3x3 board).  If you take the division in the problem statement as integer division, this is still consistent with that problem statement.  In this example, every number up to 9/2 occurs twice.  That is, every number up to 4 occurs twice.  That leaves one extra.  What do you do with that one extra?  Whatever you want, so long as you remain consistent with the problem statement.  Actually, we?ll grade quite leniently in this case, so just do something more reasonable than, say, crashing, when your function is called with an odd # of rows and cols.


?         Other oddities
There are other cases we?ve not specified, especially in the memory game.  This is moving you towards more open-ended specs (consider that the term project is entirely open-ended!).  Use your creativity!  Just try to make it fun and playable, with clear and easy-to-understand code.

 
Carpe diem.Hi all.   Important notes here. . .
 
Word is that folks are working very hard on hw6.  Good job!  Word is also that the queue has gotten very long.  We?re calling in reserves to keep it as short as possible.
 
Some might think that this is proof that hw6 should be collaborative.  I believe it?s the opposite, proof that we over-collaborated on earlier hw?s.  It is essential for you to be able to solve this SOLO.  Learning to problem solve on your own is hard, yes, definitely.  But it?s a core outcome of the course, and you?re earning your stripes now.  Kudos!!!  Soon these sorts of problems will be well within your reach.  Which is great, since soon enough you?ll be working on term projects of much greater size and complexity than hw6!
 
Now, given the serious dedication that is plainly apparent by most of you (again, way to go!), plus the extra bumps and bruises as we switch to SOLO, I am inclined to extend the deadline. So we shall;
 
Hw6 is due Tuesday at 9pm.
 
Plus, if your final submission to hw6 is prior to the original deadline of Monday at 9pm, you will get a +5 pt early-bird bonus!  (The autograder will not do this, but we will apply it later on, when we do the style grading for hw6.)
 
Plus, the one-day-late penalty will only be 10 points, rather than the usual 25.  So if you submit after Tuesday 9pm, you still can only submit until Wednesday at 9pm, but it?d only be 10 points off until then rather than 25.
 
Here are a couple other adjustments you may be interested in:
 
The hw4 show-your-work penalties were reduced by half, so not showing your work cost about 10 points rather than about 20 points.  These changes are in Autolab.
 
The Thursday attendance quiz is also reduced by half, so the maximum penalty is 25 points rather than 50 points.  (This is only for students who lost points; no change will be reflected in students who received 50/50 that day.)
 
These reductions are made with the hope that the point is still being made:  show your work, and show up on time!  Of course, we always try to balance outcomes that are fair and effective while being reasonable and consistent with historic norms for this course and for other courses in our department.  I believe these changes accomplish that.
 
That?s all the adjustments I?ve got for now.  Hope this helps, and  good luck with hw6!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  Many of you have asked how to test functions that only print stuff out and do not actually return anything, and also how to robotically test functions that use raw_input.  Good questions!
 
Well, here you go:
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112/handouts/testingConsoleFunctions.py

This may be helpful for your own testing functions for part of hw6.  This is also listed in the schedule, and we?ll also discuss it Tuesday in class.

CheersHi all.  Rumor has it that some students are trying to get around long queue waits by adding their names multiple times to the queue.  This is not very respectful of your classmates?
 
I?ll ask you not to do that.  If CA?s notice a name in the queue more than once, they will delete all copies from the queue and refer the student to me to discuss proper queue etiquette.  Of course, let?s not go there.  Let?s just please be respectful of each other and use the queue properly.

We?ll do what we can to minimize queue times.
 
Cheers.Hi all.  We are hearing that some of you are struggling with the last 2 problems on hw6 mainly because you still need more help understanding how the Othello case study in lecture works.
 
So:  if there is enough interest, we?ll put together a review session tonight and/or tomorrow evening, where a CA will walk through the Othello case study one more time.  If you do not fully understand the code, either the high-level design or the low-level details, then I highly recommend this.
 
Anyhow, to help us gauge interest, please fill out this poll NOW if you are interested:
http://www.doodle.com/nxp9bkickcy7977v
 
Also, please check your email within the hour, since we may have a session TONIGHT at 9pm!
 
More soon.

Thanks.Hi all.  We had 49 responses, that fast.  Wow!  No time or times worked for literally everyone, but two times combined covered all but 5 of you.  So we?ll go with those (and apologies to those 5?).
 
Tonight, 9pm - 10pm (maybe a bit later, as needed).
 
Tomorrow (Monday) night, 6:30pm - 7:30pm (maybe a bit later, as needed).

Both reviews are in GHC 4215.
 
Also, Michael and Connor are in GHC 4215 now, basically physically reserving it for the 9pm review tonight.   So:  this amounts to overflow OH for the next 45 minutes, if the clusters are overfull or the waits are long, you might try heading down there.
 
Hope this helps, and good luck again with hw6!
 
Oh, and to the CA?s who are leading these last-minute Othello reviews:  THANKS!!!!  :-)

Carpe diem.
1) The polls were only to gauge interest and choose good times.  Anyone can attend either session, whether or not they responded to the polls.
 
2) Sorry for the spam?.  It?s a high-volume email night?
Hi all.  I?ve seen a number of students asking whether you need to test your code.  Yes, you do (though you do not need to test the starter code).  Maybe not incredibly thoroughly, but something, yes.  This also includes functions that just print values, given that I sent code around that handles this for you (by converting printed output into a string that you can test).  That function also lets you specify a list of raw_input values to use, so you can robotically test functions that use raw_input, too.  If I were doing such tests, I?d keep the size of the board really small, just large enough to do an effective test?
 
Good luck with it.Hi all.  The autograder is posted.  It only autogrades the first two problems (solvesCryptarithm and bestScrabbleScore).  The rest will be graded manually.  Note that the CA?s will grade the Othello and Memory Game code ?at a distance?.  They will run your code, and grade the user experience, and only look at the code briefly in most cases.
 
Good luck with it!
Q: So we need to triple quoted the Othello and Memory Game code?

A: No, keep those as normal, but below the #ignore_rest line.  Just
triple-quote the non-Python answers (tracing / reasoning over code).

Cheers.Some announcements:
 
1.       Whew!
Hw6 is not easy, and indeed requires some serious effort by many of you.  And judging by the submissions, with about 1/3rd of you having completed the autograded portion, I suspect tonight may be a bit busy, too (to say the least).  Good luck with it!  But bear this in mind:  this is a push week, among the hardest few hw?s all semester.  Hw5 was not too hard last week (right?), and hw7 will not be too hard next week.  The week after that, you?re on spring break, which will be a true break (no hw, no quizzes or tests to study for, nothing).  So after you finish hw6, things lighten up quite a bit so you can prepare for the midterm, and then you have a very well-earned week off!  Whew!!!  Now, truth in advertising:  we still have a couple hard topics ahead of us (OOP and recursion), so there are still a couple challenging hw?s ahead.  But just a couple.  And another fun one, too (Tetris is not too hard, not now, not after what you?ve accomplished).  Then, after that, it?s all basically downhill.  Your term projects will indeed require sustained effort, but generally not the huge push of hw6, and in any case they should be more fun, less stressful, and less time-consuming.  And in the end, if all goes well, you?ll have a term project of your own design that you can add to your online portfolio, something to help you get a job, something you can be proud of.

Upshot:  this is one of the hardest weeks of the semester, and you?ve almost completed it.  Things WILL get easier (mostly) (really).  Just keep focused and do your best on the hw.


2.       And if hw6 isn?t going great?
Remember this, too:  your lowest two hw?s are half-weighted.  Which means they are worth about 1.5% of your semester grade.  So don?t panic.  Do give this your best shot, the ol? college effort.  But in the end, if that?s not enough, so be it.  Just turn in what you have, and be sure to attend the hw6 solution review sessions, and move on.  You can do just fine in this course without a strong grade on hw6.  Of course, it?s best to do well on it, but it?s realistic to do as well as you practically can, given the realities of your situation.  So do that, and accept it.  It will be fine.  You will be fine.


3.       Hw6 solution sessions
It?s important for most of you that you attend these.  Note that once you attend a hw solution session, you may not submit that hw again (naturally).  So if you plan to submit hw6 late, then you should attend tomorrow?s session.  Here are the logistics:
    Tuesday 8pm - Michael - Wean 5409

    Wednesday 8pm - Jordan - GHC 4211


4.  Destructiveness and the hw6 autograder
Some of you are reporting strange autograder messages.  For example, it shows an empty hand in scrabble yet the expected result includes words like ?xyz?.  How can you form the word ?xyz? from no letters?  You can?t!!!  The problem is that you are destructively modifying the hand (or the dictionary, in other cases).  So what the autograder is reporting is not the actual value supplied to the function.  Ugh.  In general, you should never destructively modify a parameter unless it is explicitly stated in the function description that you will do so.  Imagine if others did this.  Imagine if you had a list L = [1, 2], and you called len(L), and it returned 2, only as a side-effect, without your knowledge, L was modified, and now was the empty list [ ].  Ugh.  Unthinkable.  But you COULD do it.  In fact, here it is:
    def len(L):
        # This is destructive.  How awful.  Don't do this.
        result = 0
        while (L != []):
            result += 1
            L.pop()
        return result
    L = [1, 2]

    print len(L) # 2

    print L      # [ ], how horrible!!!

    print len(L) # 0,   ugh!
All that is perfectly legal code.  But how awful.  So don?t do that!  Don?t be destructive, unless you have to be destructive!


5.       Hw5 is graded
<eom>


6.       Show up at your tutoring sessions
Some of you continue to make tutoring session reservations then just not show up.  Come on, folks, that?s just not decent.  Remember, our CA?s also have their own courses and hobbies and friends and lives to live.  If they are sitting in GHC (or wherever) waiting for an appointment with you, by gosh you need to show up.


7.       Relax!
Good reading:  http://tinyurl.com/a66dkrp

 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Tonight?s Othello review session is at 6:30pm in GHC 5222 (the cube in the helix).  Mark has ever so kindly offered to do this again.  Thanks, Mark!!!!Hi all.  The stuff we discussed today about random seeds is very true, and indeed it is the way to lock down a ?reproducible random sequence?, which can be very helpful for testing and debugging.  All true.
 
But it?s rather late in the hw6 cycle, so we will NOT require that you use random.seed for hw6.
 
Also, again, your testing does not have to be extravagant, particularly for the highest-level functions which are mostly console IO-based and not really so easily testable.
 
Good luck with it.That?s the cube inside the helix.  Easily one of the coolest spaces at CMU.

Enjoy!

David
 
PS:  Carpe diem!Hi all.  Some announcements for you:
 
1.       My OH (today -> tomorrow)
Please note that I have to move my OH from today to 2-3:30pm tomorrow.


2.       Saturday Optional Lecture
The second installment of the optional lecture series will be Saturday, 1:30-3:30pm, GHC 4307.  Topics TBD, as usual, but probably either sorting algorithms or some linear algebra with matrices, or both!


3.       Read Autograder feedback
Somewhat amazingly, some students still do not seem to know that your Autolab score is a LINK that you can and should click on and which then shows you all kinds of really helpful feedback about where that score came from.  It usually tells you pretty much exactly where and why your code erred.  So:  read it!  Carefully!


4.       NG means ?No Grade? (zero)
If you have a grade marked as NG in Autolab, that means you are receiving 0 points for having No Grade, typically because you did not submit anything.  If you were excused, for whatever reason, your grade instead would be EXC.


5.       copyL = L  (not!)
Some of you submitted code like this (where L is a list)
    copyL = L
This is a bad idea, because the variable you named copyL is NOT a copy.  It is an alias.  Any change to L will change copyL, and vice versa.  You probably meant to do this:
    copyL = copy.copy(L)
Ahhhh.  That?s better!


6.       What Most Schools Don?t Teach
A number of you have forwarded this video to me over the past few days (thanks!!!):
   http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nKIu9yen5nc
I agree with its sentiments, and hope that more high schools in particular start offering more and better programming and computer science courses.Hi all.   To give you all maximum time to prepare for the upcoming midterm, there is no hw this week.
 
So you are done with your 15-112 homework until after spring break.  Nice job.

But? This is not meant to give you time off.  That comes AFTER the midterm, when you have 10 full days away from the course.

Instead, I very much hope you use this extra time to thoroughly prepare for the midterm.

For example, I would expect that you could write nthPrime from scratch in about 5 minutes.  Or nearestPrime in about the same.  You should thoroughly understand all the notes, all the case studies, all the homework, all the quizzes.  So bestScrabbleScore would be 10 minutes, and hasMoveFromCellInDirection would be 10-15 minutes.

This requires lots and lots of practice.   Practice writing code from scratch, especially on a blank sheet of paper without a Python interpreter nearby.
 
You now have a full week to practice.  Good luck with it!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  For those who qualify for extra time on today?s quiz, please show up at CA office hours tonight to take the quiz.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  A side-effect of not having a hw this week is that sets + dictionaries will not be on the first midterm.  It?s almost always the case that we don?t test material until you?ve had a hw on it.Hi all.  Here is the midterm review schedule:

Monday - Practice Midterm, followed by solution session
8:30pm, DH 2315

Tuesday - Weeks 1-4
6pm - DH 2315
7:30pm (repeat) -DH 2315

Wednesday Weeks 5-7
6:30pm - DH 2315
8pm (repeat) - DH 2210

Carpe diem.Hi all.  This is for anyone who qualifies through Larry Powell?s office for university-approved extra time on exams.  Larry Powell will be proctoring the extra-time midterms.  To receive that extra time, you must:
 
1) Send your request by email to Larry Powell, cc?ing me, BY MONDAY.
 
2) Arrange the logistics (time/location/etc) directly with Larry.

Note that you may instead elect to take the exam in your assigned lecture, but then you will not receive extra time.
 
Cheers.Hi all.  Reminder:  Saturday Optional Lecture
The second installment of the optional lecture series will be today, 1:30-3:30pm, GHC 4307.  Topics TBD, as usual, but probably either sorting algorithms or some linear algebra with matrices, or both!

 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  We had good fun today at the optional lecture.  We solved a fairly
"mathy" problem that made heavy use of 2d lists (as matrices), including
matrix inversion, polynomial curve fitting, and more.  Fun stuff.  The code
we wrote today is attached.  Use at your peril.

Also, Margaret will lead a reprise tomorrow at 7:30pm in GHC 4101.  Thanks,
Margaret!!!

If you are planning to attend the reprise, please email Margaret (cc'ed) to
let her know. Thanks.

Carpe diem.Hi all.  So office hours have been nearly empty the last couple of days.  And we have a midterm in less than a week.
 
This is an OPPORTUNITY.
 
Hint, hint, nudge, nudge.
 
:-)Hi all.  Some students have flights to catch mid-day Thursday, so we are allowing them to take the midterm starting at 9am that same day.  This is only for students with actual time conflicts with the normal midterm time, and it is only by special arrangement with me beforehand.
 
To participate, students must send me a request by Monday night (with some explanation why they need special consideration), and then they must obtain email confirmation from me, and finally they must print out that email confirmation and use it as a ticket for entry to the early midterm.  The proctors will not allow anyone to participate in the early midterm without that printed confirmation, with no exceptions.  (So then you?d just take the exam at the normal time in the normal location?)
 
Cheers.Hi all.  The trend of nearly empty office hours continues.  For all of you, but especially for those who are struggling the most in the course, this is such a golden opportunity slipping away.  Hours on end of basically individual tutoring to help prepare for the midterm.  Instead, our CA?s are getting paid to do their own homework.  Sigh.
 
Alas, there is still tonight.  Then starting Monday the organized review sessions commence, and the time for individualized tutoring at office hours will essentially have passed.
 
Carpe diem. <-- REALLY!Hi all.  Margaret will be leading the optional lecture reprise in 5 minutes in GHC 4101.
 
This actually makes for a compelling way to study for the midterm.  It uses nearly everything we?ve covered so far ? functions, loops, conditionals, ints, floats, strings, even fractions!, problem-solving, top-down design, bottom-up testing, 1d lists, 2d lists, and more ? all in one big, interesting problem.
 
Anyhow, I hope some of you make it to this once-in-a-lifetime event!!!  (Ok, that was an exaggeration, but it is the last chance this semester, and it really is interesting on its own, and it really will help you prepare for the midterm.)

Carpe diem.Hi all.  Thursday?s midterm covers through week 6, not week 7, and through hw6.  So, for example, sets and maps are not on it.  We did see Exceptions at least briefly before week 7, so try/except can appear in some simple form, but not the rest of the Exceptions notes.  Also, no bonus topics will appear, nor any ?additional? topics (so, for example, bitwise operators will not be on the exam).  Of course, none of this applies to bonus questions, which may cover anything whatsoever, including material we?ve not yet covered.  As for format, anything is game (of course).  The only thing I will say is that the exam will be entirely on paper (no computers).
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  While this isn?t directly related to 15-112, here?s a chance for the more creative among you to use your newfound Python skills!  And maybe win $100!  And get your artwork displayed in GHC!  See below for details, if you are interested (and of course this is entirely optional).
 
Carpe diem.

David Hi all.  Important note:  the 10:30-noon midterm is relocated to McConomy in the UC.  Please show up early, and please sit every other seat.
 
The noon-1:30 midterm is in Kelly?s usual lecture hall.
 
The 9-10:30am early session has been announced to those students who signed up.
 
And those students with extra-time who have contacted me will work directly with Larry Powell to schedule a time and location.
 
Carpe diem. Another curious opportunity  (of which I know nothing, but it seems interesting).
 
David Hi all.  Since we are delivering the midterm at several different times and locations, it is essential for everyone to respect exam security.  In short, this means that you shall not discuss anything about the midterm with anyone in the course who has not yet taken the exam.  Seriously, mum?s the word.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Thanks to the amazing efforts our CA?s (thanks, CA?s!!!), the midterms are all graded (and the exam is also posted on our course website now).

The results are encouraging.  The raw median was 71, to which 9 points were added (to all non-zero scores), so the adjusted median is 80, with fully 5% scoring 100 or higher, and a top score of a perfect 114 (wow!).
 
The scores in Autolab reflect the +9-point adjustment.  Here is the resulting grade distribution:

A: 24%
B: 29%
C: 23%
D: 15%
R:  9%
 
With over half of you scoring an A or B, this is a reasonably solid distribution, and is especially heartening in light of the not-enough-solo issues earlier in the semester.  It reflects well on your collective hard work.  Nice job, folks!  Also, so you know:  usually, the second midterm distribution is a bit stronger, and the final exam distribution a bit stronger still.  If we stick to that trend, things will be just fine.  Of course, sticking to that trend requires more hard work (by all of us!) after spring break.  But for now, just enjoy your very well-earned spring break!
 
One more thing, first:  Autolab is now completely current.  It also now includes the half-weighted policies:  your lowest 2 quizzes are half-weighted, and each of your lowest collab and lowest solo hw?s are also half-weighted.  When the second midterm occurs, your lower midterm will also be half-weighted.  As for the hw?s:  at the start of the semester, I announced that we might have to tweak the half-weight policy for hw?s.  Well, given how we ultimately split collab and solo hw?s, I had to do just that, so two hw?s are indeed half-weighted, but it?s the lowest collab hw and the lowest solo hw.
 
In any case, with Autolab grades current, I will be using them to enter your midsemester grades tomorrow.  Meanwhile, you may contact me if you believe there are any discrepancies or other issues I should be aware of.

Carpe diem.Hi all.  Some have asked about quiz3-redux. It was not a make-up quiz, it is just a normal quiz.  The only difference is that it covered the same material as the previous quiz.  But it is a normal quiz weighted like any other quiz.

Thanks.Hi all.  Please note that I have to move tomorrow?s (Wednesday?s) office hours to Friday, still 1-3pm.  My Thursday office hours this week are still 5:30-6:30.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  The optional midterm solution review sessions will be:

Wednesday 8:30 pm - GHC 4307
Thursday 8:30 pm - DH 2315

Enjoy!

David Hi all.  Note that the syllabus has always said hw?s are worth 30%, without distinction between the types of homeworks, and so we will remove this distinction from Autolab.  All hw?s will appear under a single hw category.  For one thing, this will allow for hybrid half-collab/half-solo hw?s (such as the next hw!).
 
Note that SOLO still means SOLO, and you must work alone on those parts!

Carpe diem.Hi again.  Hw7 will be due Monday night.   Do hw8 from last semester (the collab parts are still collab, solo is still solo, just as on that hw).  Also, as a SOLO, do friendsOfFriends from last semester?s hw7b.
 
Good luck!Hi all.  Due to a meeting change, I need to move my OH tomorrow to 11am to noon.  I have a 10am meeting that may end a bit early, so I may be there closer to 10:30 or so.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  3 Things:
 
1) friendsOfFriends is in hw7a not hw7b (sorry).
2) You may form your own groups for this hw.  For those seeking to be assigned groups, ask your CA?s at recitation tomorrow and they?ll help out.
3) Carpe diem.Hi all.  Two more things (both important):
 
1) No globals!
You may not use any globals, even though the tutorials do!  You need to change the code you submit so they don?t!
 
2) Separate files per game
Contrary to last year?s writeup, this time you will submit each game in its own file, and all those files will be placed in a single zip file which you will submit (the writeup, which should be out tomorrow, will clarify this).  This makes your life much easier (truly).
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  This week?s optional topic is probably going to be a brief introduction to AI to play turn-based, perfect-knowledge (no chance, no dice, no hidden state) 1-Player games (like sliding puzzles (such as this:  http://mypuzzle.org/sliding), using A*) and 2-Player games (like checkers, chess, Othello, and connect4, using Minimax).
 
I had discussed doing Javascript+Canvas with some students, but I think we?ll do that next time.
 
We?ll meet today, 1:30-3:30pm, in GHC 4307.
 
The reprise is tomorrow (Sunday), starting at 2:30pm, in GHC 4101.
 
Enjoy!Hi all.  Good fun today solving the N puzzle with A*.  Woohoo.  The attached code has a bug since it works better than optimally, which seems unlikely.  In any case, here it is.  Enjoy.

Carpe diem.Hi all.  I have received a couple dozen requests for extensions on hw8 due to Passover, Greek Sing, and several athletic events.  For all these reasons, we?ll extend the deadline to Wednesday night.
 
However?
 
You are strongly encouraged to finish by Monday night as originally scheduled, and our schedule will reflect that.  So we will staff weekend office hours as normal, and Monday night will have extra office hours.  We will not provide extra office hours on Tuesday or Wednesday (though we will have our usual office hours those nights).
 
Also, the hw solution reviews will still be on Monday and Tuesday, as usual, and once you attend a hw solution review, you (obviously) may no longer submit the hw!
 
If at all possible, finish by Monday, and use Tuesday and Wednesday for tutoring, extra studying, or learning next week?s material (object-oriented programming!).
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Hw7 is posted.  The only change to the pre-release is that the names of the files are now specified, as is the description of how to zip the files into a single hw7.zip file.
 
HINT:  After you submit, download the file you submitted, and unzip it, and verify that it contains the files you think it does!  This is really important, since every semester we have some students who submit EMPTY zip files.  Unfortunately, if you do that, you will not receive the credit for your hard work.  So, be sure to check!
 
Here are a few other hw7 tidbits:
 
?         No globals
Do not use any globals!  Use closures in your run functions to get around this.


?         Poison flexibility
Many have asked about poison placement, noting that the spec allows for some freedom on your part.  Right!  You must abide by the spec, but so long as you do that, the rest is up to you.  But don?t veer from the spec, either in poison placement or anywhere else!


?         Don?t use stippling
Some of you tried to use stippling to gray out the screen, which does not work on Macs.  I did not expect you to use features we did not cover, such as stippling.  So your solution must also work on Macs.  Just have the various colors you use depend on whether or not you are paused.


?         No load screen
Unlike last semester, this time we are placing each program in its own file, so we don?t have to create a load screen.

 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Here are a few more announcements:
 
1.       Hw review tonight
8pm in Wean 5409.  Be sure to submit before attending, since you can?t submit after!


2.       late to lecture
A new trend has arisen where many people are arriving late to lecture.  This is proving to be very disruptive and has to stop.  Starting Thursday, people who are late to lecture will have to wait outside with a CA until an appropriate time to enter (probably about 15 minutes into the lecture).  This is how they do it at symphonies.


3.       Web App in a Weekend
I have been asked to share this with you:
?Web App in a Weekend , a ScottyLabs event this Friday and Saturday featuring a virtual walk-through/workshop of creating a Facebook-like application. I think it is particularly relevant to  15-112 students since they are just beginning programmers--and we have actually designed these courses to guide design and humanities majors.   We will literally take attendees step by step through the process and have some time to make sure we can trouble-shoot, problem-solve, and get everyone up to speed with each of the 5 classes, and students are free to come to any subset of mini-courses they choose. (See here:
https://www.facebook.com/events/132621743586025/?fref=ts)?

4.       Bug in bonus lecture code
As you may recall, our code worked ?better than perfect?.  Here was the problem:
def solveBoardFasterWayWithPriorityQueue(state):
    state.moveList = "" # THIS LINE WAS MISSING!

    global totalMoves

 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  The 15-112 final exam is Friday May 10th at 8:30am.  Please check your final exam schedule for all your courses and let me know by tomorrow if you have a conflict with the 15-112 final.  A ?conflict? is defined as either 2 finals at the same time, or 3 finals in a 24-hour period.
 
If you do have a conflict, please reply by tomorrow, and please list the details of the conflict (which other courses are conflicting, and the times of their finals).  I will then poll those students to find a time for an alternate final exam, possibly that following Saturday or Monday.  You may only sit for the alternate exam by explicit pre-approval from me which is only granted for university-approved conflicts as noted above.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  The extra hw7 solution review session will be tonight at 8pm in GHC 4211. Thanks Mark!Hi all.  I need to move my OH back 30 minutes, so they start at 6pm tonight.

I will be here at least until 7:30 or perhaps a bit later.  So you can safely show up a bit later than 6pm and still know I will get to chat with you.
 
Sorry for the late notice.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  Due to my extended OH (which is still ongoing), I will not be able to post the hw in time to count today, so?.
 
Hw8 will be posted by tomorrow and will be due Tuesday at 9pm.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  Hw8 is now posted, and is due Wednesday at 9pm.  This includes extra time for those celebrating holidays, attending athletic events, or otherwise doing something besides 15-112 this weekend.  This is not the largest hw ever assigned, to be sure, but still you should get an early jump on it, as OOP can be tricky.  Note that the recursion hw will be assigned Wednesday and will be due Sunday night as normal.
 
The hw8 solution review sessions will be
    Wednesday 9pm GHC 4307
    Thursday 9pm GHC 4307
 
Finally, I managed to re-injure my finger last night, making typing very challenging right now.  So I unfortunately must postpone tomorrow?s optional lecture (sorry).   I should think we?ll resume next week.
 
Carpe diem!Hi all.  Here are a couple hints for hw8:
 
#1) We never create an instance of the Util class (look at the code to confirm this).  Hmmm.  What might that mean?  By analogy, another class like that is the math class.  Think about it.  You call math.sin(x) and math.cos(x), but do you ever create an instance of the math class, something like myMath = math()?  What might this tell you about how to implement the Util class?
 
#2) When you implement the Line class, you should use that method you defined in the Util class.  That?s why it?s there.
 
Carpe diem.There?s lots of these.  This one is especially well done.  Enjoy!Hi all.  To give you adequate time to study for the midterm after the recursion hw (the last hw in this course!), we will move Midterm 2 back two days to Thursday of next week (11-Apr).  This also means it may have a more challenging recursion question on it.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  As the subject says?  The hw8 autograder is posted.
 
Note that while you will see your score, and some small hint (if you study the output enough) as to where points were lost (if any were), you will not get the usual very complete autograder output.  But you should know that the tests are basically the same as the ones provided to you, just with different numbers to avoid hardcoded answers.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  There seem to be some issues with the autograder using version 2.6 rather than 2.7.  Ugh.
 
In the autograder version, when you construct a Fraction, you must provide 2 int values (not floats or Fractions).
 
Also, to access the denominator of a fraction, use f.denominator.
 
Since some of you have used submissions for this, you now all have 10 total submissions for hw8.  Enjoy!
 
Sorry for the confusion
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  A few hw8 hints for you:
 
?         Store numerator and denominator as Fraction instances
I mentioned this before, but maybe it didn?t sink in.  In your Line constructor, do something like this:
     this.m = Fraction(m)
Then, for example, you can take -1/m and you?ll get another Fraction instance, as you?d hope for.


?         Do not use floats. 
No need to convert between Fractions (which are exact) and floats (which are not).  It just mucks things up.


?         Use the Util classmethod we wrote.
That?s why we wrote it.


?         What the different Line tests are testing?
The private autograder uses the same tests as the public one, just with different values.  On a failed test, you basically only get to know which test # failed.  Here is the public code with comments indicating the test #?s of each part:


    ### Line TEST #1
    assert(str(Line(2,5))  == "y=2x+5")
    assert(str(Line(2,-5)) == "y=2x-5")
    assert(str(Line(0,5))  == "y=5")
    assert(str(Line(1,5))  == "y=x+5")
    assert(str(Line(-1,5)) == "y=-x+5")
    assert(str(Line(0,-5)) == "y=-5")
    assert(str(Line(0,0))  == "y=0")
    assert(str(Line(Fraction(2,3),Fraction(1,3)))  == "y=2/3x+1/3")
    assert(str(Line(Fraction(2,3),Fraction(-2,6)))  == "y=2/3x-1/3")
    # hint: be sure to understand the difference between str(x) and repr(x)
    assert(str([Line(0,1), Line(1,0)]) == "[Line(0, 1), Line(1, 0)]")
    assert(str([Line(Fraction(1,2),3)]) == "[Line(Fraction(1, 2), 3)]")
   
    ### Line TEST #2
    line1 = Line(2,3)
    assert(str(line1) == "y=2x+3")
    assert(line1.getSlope() == 2)
    assert(type(line1.getSlope()) == int)
    assert(line1.getIntercept() == 3)
    assert(line1.getSlope.__doc__ == "Return the slope (m) of the line.")
 
    ### Line TEST #3
    line2 = Line(6,-5)
    assert(str(line2) == "y=6x-5")
    assert(line2.getSlope() == 6)
    assert(line2.getIntercept() == -5)
    assert(line1.getIntersection(line2) == (2, 7))
   
    ### Line TEST #4
    line3 = Line(2, -3)
   assert(line3.isParallelTo(line1) == True)
    assert(line3.isParallelTo(line2) == False)
 
    ### Line TEST #5
    # Two lines intersect in a point!
    assert(line3.getIntersection(line2) == (Fraction(1,2), -2))
 
    ### Line TEST #6
    # The normal line is the line that is perpendicular to
   # the given line, intersecting at the given x value.
    # Note that the product of the slopes of perpendicular lines is -1.
    line4 = line3.getNormalLine(4)
    assert(str(line4) == "y=-1/2x+7")
    assert(line4.getSlope() == Fraction(-1,2))
    assert(line4.getIntercept() == 7)
   
    ### Line TEST #7
    assert(Line(1, 2) == Line(1, 2))
    assert(Line(1, 2) != Line(1, 3))
    assert(not (Line(1, 2) == "don't crash here!"))
 
    ### Line TEST #8
    s = set()
    assert(Line(1, 2) not in s)
    s.add(Line(1, 2))
    assert(Line(1, 2) in s)
    s.remove(Line(1, 2))
    assert(Line(1, 2) not in s)
 

Good luck!
 
Carpe diem!Some of you have high scores on Autolab without following our hints.  That?s fine.   Whatever Autolab gives you is your score, so you do not need to change your code in that case.
 
But?  If your code is not passing the Autolab tests, then you really should follow our hints.  In general, most of you would probably find them to be very useful.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Hw9 is posted.  It is due Sunday.  It is entirely collaborative, with groups of up to 4 total students.  You are strongly encouraged to collaborate.  And to start early.
 
Also, note this:  To give you more time to study for the upcoming midterm exam, we will solve one or more of the assigned exercises in recitation this week (what a deal!).  You may not take notes at that time (so you will have to reproduce the solutions on your own), but you may pay very close attention!  :-)
 
That?s the last hw of the semester.  Then it?s wall-to-wall term projects.  Woohoo!!!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Please note that the hw8 solution review sessions are:
 
Wednesday (tonight) 9pm GHC 4307
Thursday (tomorrow night) 9pm GHC 4307

Carpe diem.Hi all.  I just had a rather pointed discussion with students in Lecture 1 about this, but for those who were not there (and for those who were?.):
 
There has been an increase in cheating cases recently, both on homeworks and quizzes.  We take the integrity of the course very seriously.  We owe this to you, the 99% who are not cheating.  But for that 1% who may consider cheating, know that we are actively catching and prosecuting these cases.  First offenses generally result in lowered semester grades in this course and a letter to the Dean of Student Affairs, your dean, your advisor, my dean, and others, all of whom may wish to discuss your behavior with you.  Second offenses generally result in dismissal from the university for at least one year.
 
The costs are so high, and the benefits are so low.  It?s just a losing game, even if you ignore the ethics and evaluate it strictly as a game.
 
In any case, it both saddens and exhausts me having to deal with this.  But I will, you can be sure, again out of respect to the great majority of  honest, hard-working students who make this job so enjoyable (when I?m not dealing with this).
 
I love teaching.  I hate policing.  Please let me teach.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  For your hw9 planning purposes, in recitation tomorrow you will solve these hw9 problems:  2.B. (one of the Reasoning Over Code problems), 4 (findLargestFile),a nd 5 (fractalMickeyMouse).  Once again, no computer use or note-taking at that time.  We want you to understand this well enough to reproduce the results later on your own.
 
Thanks, and have fun!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  Please note that I have to move today?s office hours to tomorrow.  I?ll add some extra time, though, so they?ll be tomorrow 3:30pm to 5:30pm (and later as needed).
 
I?ve really enjoyed the discussions so far on your term project ideas (so many great ones!).  I look forward to more!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  For those taking extra-time quizzes today:  you may either arrange with Margaret to take it this evening, or you can stop by my office tomorrow any time from 1pm to 5pm to take it.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  Says one CA:  ?I noticed that quite a few students were copying and pasting the nQueens code into their solveABC code without really understanding it.?  This is a really bad idea.   The problems are similar enough that you absolutely should study and understand the nQueens code before attempting the solveABC problem.  You bet.  But they are different enough that the copy-paste-edit approach will cost you lots of time and effort and grief.
 
Debugging recursion is really tricky.  You can be ?nearly done? for a very long time.  And so:  your best bet, by far, is getting it right, or at least as close to right as possible, on the first shot.  Copy-paste-editing nQueens almost guarantees this will not happen.
 
Good luck with it.Hi all.  Instead of our usual Saturday afternoon optional lecture, the CA?s have very kindly offered to give several optional lectures tomorrow night on topics that some of you may find especially helpful for term projects (thanks, CA?s!!!!).
 
These will be tomorrow night in GHC 4215 at the following times:
5:00-6:00 Jordan ? JavaScript + canvas
6:15-7:15 Michael - Panda3d
7:30-8:30 Mark ? client/server, peer-to-peer
 
Enjoy!!!Hi all.  This is only for those of you in lecture 1 (since everyone in lecture 2 already will take the midterm at noon).  And this is entirely optional.
 
We are looking for 48 volunteers who would take the exam from noon to 1:20pm rather than 10:30am to noon.
 
If you are in lecture 1 and you wish to do this, please fill out this Doodle poll today, providing your andrew id as your name:
 
http://www.doodle.com/72n9cwr9u49geh73
 
Due to space constraints, we can only accommodate the first 48 respondents, so again please fill the poll out now if you are interested.
 
Thanks.
 
Carpe diem.Hi again.   Please note:  due to Doodle being goofy, you must not only enter your andrew id but actually select the one-and-only option (click on the radio button in the blue highlighted area) before clicking Save, or you will not be registered. Sigh?

Cheers.

David Hi again.  So the Doodle form is just a total lose.  Oh well.
 
We?ll start over.
 
If you are in the 10:30 lecture and you want to take the noon exam, which we hope 48 of you do!, then please fill out this Google doc:
 
http://tinyurl.com/bmtg6w3
 
Please do this even if you somehow managed to get that Doodle poll to work.
 
Thanks!

David Hi all.  There are some midterm2 practice materials posted on the course website.  We?ll add some more ?Reasoning over code? problems soon.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Please note that you cannot use listFiles in findLargestFiles.  That is, you cannot construct a list and then afterwards iterate over that list.  Instead, your function must return the largest file (and maybe some other info, in a tuple, that is undone in a wrapper function) at each level.  Creating the list is wasteful, and besides, it means that all the interesting recursion was done for you already, which would make this a rather uninteresting question!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  A happy good morning to everyone.  Spring is finally here, Carnival is around the corner, and the end of the semester lies just beyond that.  As for 112, we?re about to start (and many of you have already started) term projects, which should be great fun.
 
Of course, there is this last homework.  Today may be a big push for many of you.  If you hit a roadblock, don?t get discouraged.    This stuff is hard!  Use your resources wisely.   Work closely with your hw group.  Go to office hours early (it will be predictably very busy later on).  Avoid 10+ hour heroic stints in the cluster -- take breaks along the way, finding time to eat and exercise a bit.  And just do your level best.
 
In addition to the midterm reviews I posted, we?ll have the hw9 solution review sessions at their usual times:
   Mon, 9pm, GHC 4307
   Tue, 8pm, Wean 5409
These will also be a great help preparing for the midterm, not to mention simply helping learn this challenging material.
 
You?ve been climbing a large mountain for almost 3 months now.  I commend your effort!  Now you are getting very near the top.  Today is the last day of the last hw of the semester.  You can do it!
 
Good luck!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Since some have asked, there is no autograder this week! 
 
Good luck!!!Hi all.  We?re halfway there, but we still seek 2 dozen more students to take the exam at noon rather than 10:30am on Thursday.
 
If you are interested, please fill out this Google form:
 
http://tinyurl.com/bmtg6w3
 
Thanks again!Hi all.  As we will discuss in class tomorrow, each of you will be assigned a CA as your term project mentor, who will guide you through the term project process, monitor your progress, and ultimately assign your term project grade (working closely with all the other mentors to ensure consistency).
 
To that end, please fill out this Term Project Mentor Sign-Up Form:
    http://tinyurl.com/cnejttp
 
It is due by noon tomorrow.  I ask that everyone sign up, even if you have no distinct preference (the form provides for that option).
 
The form will ask you to choose your preferred mentors (or just choose "any" if that's your preference). If you are unsure who the CA's are, you can look at their photos here: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112/staff_photos/

You can list up to 4 preferred mentors, in order of your preference. You can also list up to 2 anti-preferences (for whatever reason, it's fine).
 
Again, we ask that everyone submits the form, but if you do not submit the form by noon tomorrow, you will be randomly assigned a mentor (which of course is fine, since all our CA?s are so wonderful!  :-) ).
 
Carpe diem.Hi again.  I should add this:  some mentors may be heavily over-requested.  We?ll do our very best to give everyone one of their top choices, but it will help us a lot if you indicate several and not just one or two.
 
Thanks.
 
David Hi all.  I?ll get this posted to the course website tomorrow, but in case you want it sooner?
 
Attached is a collection of 44 more midterm2 practice problems written by the CA?s (thanks, CA?s!!!!).  They have plenty of reasoning over code, and plenty of other problems, too.
 
Also, there are these practice problems from s12:
http://www.kosbie.net/cmu/spring-12/15-112/handouts/midterm2-practice.html
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Former 15-112 student Derek Lengenfelder (dlengenf@andrew.cmu.edu) has kindly offered to give an informal talk/demo on Kivy (http://kivy.org), which some of you may consider using for your term projects (though there is little time left to make that move!).  Kivy is basically a PyGame alternative that works not only on PC?s and Macs but also Android and iPhone.  It also supports multi-touch events.
 
Kivy seems to be really cool.  Unfortunately, it also seems to be somewhat quirky and not necessarily super-easy to learn (most students who attempted to use Kivy last semester wound up using Tkinter).  Derek managed to get a Kivy project working, and has since invested a lot of energy into making it easier for others to learn (though that is still a work in progress).  He will share his wisdom, and his code, in a talk tomorrow (Wednesday) noon to 1pm, location TBD.
 
If you are interested, please email Derek for specifics.
 
Thanks, Derek!!!Hi all.  Former 15-112 student Derek Lengenfelder (dlengenf@andrew.cmu.edu) has kindly offered to give an informal talk/demo on Kivy (http://kivy.org), which some of you may consider using for your term projects (though there is little time left to make that move!).  Kivy is basically a PyGame alternative that works not only on PC?s and Macs but also Android and iPhone.  It also supports multi-touch events.
 
Kivy seems to be really cool.  Unfortunately, it also seems to be somewhat quirky and not necessarily super-easy to learn (most students who attempted to use Kivy last semester wound up using Tkinter).  Derek managed to get a Kivy project working, and has since invested a lot of energy into making it easier for others to learn (though that is still a work in progress).  He will share his wisdom, and his code, in a talk tomorrow (Wednesday) noon to 1pm, location TBD.
 
If you are interested, please email Derek for specifics.
 
Thanks, Derek!!!Hi all.  Former 15-112 student Derek Lengenfelder (dlengenf@andrew.cmu.edu) has kindly offered to give an informal talk/demo on Kivy (http://kivy.org), which some of you may consider using for your term projects (though there is little time left to make that move!).  Kivy is basically a PyGame alternative that works not only on PC?s and Macs but also Android and iPhone.  It also supports multi-touch events.
 
Kivy seems to be really cool.  Unfortunately, it also seems to be somewhat quirky and not necessarily super-easy to learn (most students who attempted to use Kivy last semester wound up using Tkinter).  Derek managed to get a Kivy project working, and has since invested a lot of energy into making it easier for others to learn (though that is still a work in progress).  He will share his wisdom, and his code, in a talk tomorrow (Wednesday) noon to 1pm, location TBD.
 
If you are interested, please email Derek for specifics.
 
Thanks, Derek!!!Hi all.  The midterm exam will occur at different times in 5 separate locations tomorrow, and you must attend the right one, so please read this carefully.  Also, when you attend, please be certain to sit every other seat, and if that?s not possible (as will be the case in DH 2210), then the overflow seating must be in the front few rows).
 
Once again, you must attend your assigned seating!
 
Here are the 5 groups and their times/locations:
 
1)      Larry Powell group
If you have pre-arranged with Larry Powell for university-approved extra time on the exam, then continue to work directly with Larry to arrange a time and location to take the exam tomorrow.


2)      Kelly?s Lecture
Everyone in Kelly?s lecture (Lecture 2) will take the exam at the normal time and place.  That is, at noon in HH B103.


3)      My Lecture / Noon seating
For those in Lecture 1 who requested a noon exam time, you should have just received an email from me confirming that exam location:  SH 125, starting at noon.


4)      My Lecture / 10:30 seating / Andrew id?s AA*** to CKH***
For those in Lecture 1 taking the exam at 10:30am and with andrew id?s alphabetically between AA*** to CKH***, you should have just received an email from me confirming that exam location:   HH B131, starting at 10:30am.
Hi all.  Please note that there is no recitation tomorrow.  Enjoy the time off!

Also, you all should meet, if briefly, with your mentors as soon as possible to discuss your term project ideas.  Today is ideal, tomorrow is ok (say, during the non-recitation?), Saturday is getting really late for this meeting.
 
The meeting is required.  It?s short notice, but we have to get going quickly.  The semester is almost over!!!
 
I?ll get this semester?s term project spec out today.  But don?t wait for that to meet with your mentors!!!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  Now that we are in term project mode, the CA?s will reduce office hours (which they must so that they have lots of time to help mentor your projects).  So from here on out, ignore the schedule on the website.  Here is the adjusted schedule, effective immediately:
 
Mon: 7-10 pm

Tue: 6-9 pm

Wed: 7-10 pm

Thu: 7-10 pm

Fri: 6-8 pm

Sat: 2-6 pm

Sun: 2-6 pm

 
There will likely be just one CA on duty at most times.  We?ll see.
 
Cheers.Hi all.   Looks like I can?t get the term project writeup finalized before tomorrow.  But there can be no delays in getting started!  Time is precious.  So here is a pre-release of what you need to know for this weekend:  as I already noted in email, you should meet (or already have met) with your mentor asap.  Preferably today if you?ve not done so already.  These are mandatory meetings to get you started on the right foot.
 
Next: by TUESDAY at 9PM, your first installment is due.  In that portion, you will submit:
 
* A project proposal, clearly defining the problem you intend to solve and a fairly detailed description of how you intend to solve it. In particular, your proposal must list all modules/technologies you plan to use outside of Tkinter.
 
* Technology demonstrations.  For each module/technology you listed in your proposal, you must include a demonstration of your suitable competency with that technology.
 
* A competitive analysis, where you scour the web and find several existing products that are similar to what you propose.  You need to use those products and carefully think about them, then list a few features in those products that are especially compelling, that you plan to include in your program.  Also, try to list some anti-features, which are features you do not like in those products and plan to change in your program.  Do not just exhaustively list all the features of those apps, since they will have tons of features that are not really relevant to your program.  Stick to those few features that are directly relevant to what you are building.  This is not a short piece of work.  Doing a competitive analysis well will take several hours at least.
 
* A storyboard, where you include hand-drawn pictures (do not worry about making them pretty) showing how your app will work from the user?s perspective.  Using your storyboard, you will walk your mentor through the user experience of your program, and you will do this prior to writing lots of code.  This way, your mentor can help you make any necessary adjustments to your design prior to your having a huge investment in a large code base.
* Code artifacts.  This is not required, but to the extent that you have written code by Tuesday, you should include that in your submission, too.
 
More details will be out tomorrow, but this is enough for all of you to get going in earnest.
 
Now, all that is due Tuesday night, but I recommend you complete it sooner, even by Saturday if possible.  You want to get going writing your actual term project code in earnest.  You will have a code deliverable (more details tomorrow?) due one week from Tuesday, but that also is just after Carnival weekend.  We do NOT want you working hard over Carnival.  So get your jump now!!!!
 
Bottom line:  The next week, leading up to Carnival, is easily the most important week for your term project success.  You should hit the ground running, and try to make lots of headway this week.

Good luck!!!
 
And, of course? Carpe diem!!!Hi all.  I continue to get emails from some of you about this.  Today is the last day to contact me, if you have not already.  Tomorrow, I?ll poll everyone with a conflict to find the time for our alternate exam that works the best for the most people.
 
Note that this is only for university-approved exam conflicts -- two exams at the same time or three exams in 24 hours.  That?s it.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  This week?s optional lecture and reprise will be given by Oguz Ulgen (former 112 student) and Justin Frye (current 112 CA).  The topic:  Higher-Order Functions in Python.  The talk will demonstrate many of the ideas covered in 15-150, but in the context of Python.  It?s a perfect follow-on to our coverage of first-order functions and recursion.
 
I have attached a file containing much of the code they will be discussing in this talk.  You can peek now, though it will make much more sense when they explain it.
 
The talk will be:  Saturday: GHC 4307 (1:30 to 3:30 pm)
 
The reprise will be:  Sunday: GHC 4101 (1:00 to 3:00 pm) 
 
Should be really interesting!
 
Thanks, Oguz and Justin!!!!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  Thanks to the awesome efforts of our CA?s, the midterms grades are posted in Autolab.  4 points were added to every non-zero score (which is already reflected in Autolab), raising the median to 80.  This is a solid performance.  Things are clearly clicking along now.
 
I hope your term projects are going well!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  While people did reasonably well on midterm2, most of you could really use more review of that material, all of which is definitely fair game for the final exam.
 
To that end:  here are the midterm2 solution review sessions:
 
Tuesday, 7pm, DH 2315
Wednesday, 8:30pm, GHC 4307
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  It?s posted.  You should read it very carefully!

The deliverable due tomorrow at 9pm is exactly as I sent last week, except it also includes a timesheet (just guesstimate what time you?ve already invested).  Also, to avoid any penalties, be sure to read the part about Missed Meetings.
 
I hope your term projects are going well!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  Please note the following changes to office hours (CA?s and mine) partly due to Carnival and partly to focus more CA time on direct mentor meetings (and so less time on general office hours):
 
?         CA Office Hours

o   Today:  6:30-8pm

o   Tomorrow thru Sunday:  No CA Office Hours (use Piazza, or contact your mentor)

o   Next week:

?  Mon-Fri 6:30-8pm

?  Sat-Sun: 4:30-6pm


?         My Office Hours

o   Today: 5:30-6:30pm

o   Tomorrow: None (I will extend Thursday OH, and also be available via email as needed)

o   Thursday:  5:30-6:30pm (and later as needed)

o   Next week:  normal schedule

 
Thanks.Hi all.  Please note that while the remaining lectures will not be covered either in hw?s or quizzes, the material can and very well may appear on the final exam.  And there may be few if any notes posted in some cases (not today, but later on), so really your best bet is to attend!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Thanks for your interest in CA?ing 15-112 in the fall-13 semester.   The next step is a 15-minute first-round interview with me.  For that, please fill out this Doodle poll listing ALL the times you may be available:
 
http://www.doodle.com/xskwp4sei7af6sb2
 
Thanks again!Hi all.  Due to the low median on quiz3redux, we?ll let you all have a chance to optionally improve your understanding and, hopefully, your score on that quiz.  How so?  Next Thursday (25-Apr), in lecture, we?ll offer an optional quiz on the same material (so it?s really ?quiz3reduxredux?!).  Your score on quiz3redux will be the higher of your original score and this new quiz.  And so this new quiz is entirely optional:  you can skip it entirely without affecting your grade.  Your choice.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Darn it all, but the university now apparently has new rules for alternate finals, and we are being told we have to arrange for this on Tuesday, May 14th.  So we?ll see how that works.
 
I apologize for the confusion, but?  If you have a final exam conflict, please fill out this Doodle poll yet again, and please list ALL times that you at all could possibly make it:
http://www.doodle.com/yyszvw94hysn9ntc
 
I?ll do my best to find a time that works for most/all of you, and that the university will actually let us use.  Sigh.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  Please note that my office hours for this week are:
 
Tuesday (tomorrow) 1:30pm to 3pm (well, 2:55pm).
 
Wednesday 4:30pm to 6pm.
 
Thursday 6pm to 7pm.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  This is only for those of you who qualify for taking an alternate final exam due to a university-approved conflict (an exam occurring at the same time, or 3 exams in 25 hours, or a university event (such as an athletic contest) at the same time).
 
Note that any emails (to you or from you) about the alternate final that have been sent prior to this email were only to help with scheduling, and do not qualify anyone to actually sit for the alternate exam.
 
To sit for the alternate exam, you must:
?         Send an email to me, in reply to this email, listing all the details of your conflict (even if you already sent me such an email), and

?         Receive an email in response from me explicitly confirming that you may take the alternate final, and

?         Bring a physical copy of that confirmation email to the alternate final exam.

 
Nobody will be admitted to the alternate final exam without that printed email confirmation from me, so please be sure to follow the protocol properly.
 
With all that said, for those who do qualify and who receive that email confirmation from me, the alternate final exam will be on Saturday, May 11, from 4pm to 7pm, in GHC 4211.
 
This date and time is known to work for nearly everyone who responded to the Doodle poll.  However, for those two or three students who have a conflict with our May 10 final and also have a conflict with the May 11 alternate final:  first, we ask that you please find a way to resolve the conflict elsewise.  But, if required, you may take an ?Alternate Alternate Final? later Saturday night or perhaps early Sunday morning.  This would be strictly by special arrangement with me, all with explicit email verification.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  The university has doubled back on themselves and will allow our original plan, as detailed below.  Please re-read the appended email.  This should be the final word (so to speak) on the matter.  Sorry for the confusion.Hi again.  Please remember to bring your laptops to class tomorrow so you can do your user studies!
 
Cheers.Hi all.  Most of you are clicking along smartly on your term projects now (huzzah!).  And some of you are struggling but managing.  Keep at it!  A very small group, though, is not making much if any progress, despite trying hard.  Some in that last group have expressed interest in switching projects.  For them?
 
Do not just switch projects on your own at this point!!!   First, talk to your mentor (always the best advice for anyone with any problem on their term project).  You might be better served sticking with your current project, maybe in some reduced form.  And in any case if you do switch, you most definitely need to have a careful plan devised with your mentor prior to switching, since the risks of not finishing at this point would be very high.  For these reasons:  the only way to switch projects at this point is with explicit approval in email from your mentor.
 
Also, even if you switch, we cannot adjust the deliverable deadlines, so you may well have to take a reduced grade on those.  Even so, most of the points are in the final deliverable, so regardless of how anyone has done so far, there is ample cause for giving it your best shot from here on out.
 
Good luck with your projects.Hi again.  Please note that we will have an optional quiz tomorrow in class, covering quiz3redux.  It is optional in the sense that your quiz3redux score will be the maximum of the original score and tomorrow?s (so if you score 0 on tomorrow?s, it will not influence your grade).  Having said that, it may be good to study at least a bit before taking the quiz?
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Updated policy:  for those who did worse on quiz3 than quiz3redux, if it helps your grade, tomorrow?s score will replace the lower of your quiz3 and quiz3redux scores.Hi all.  It?s a high-volume email day?
 
Following on my comments in yesterday?s lecture, here is an article discussing a combined social/technological approach to addressing the reliability problems that arise in certain crowdsourcing situations:
 
http://www.technologyreview.com/news/514056/preventing-misinformation-from-spreading-through-social-media/
 
If that link gives you trouble, here?s the equivalent tinyurl:
     http://tinyurl.com/cbzufqv
 
Good reading.  Whether or not they have ?the? solution (does anyone?), this is the sort of work I was referring to.Hi all.  Darn it but I have to cancel today?s office hours.  Sorry about that.
 
I have OH tomorrow 6-7pm and I?ll stay later as needed.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  Please bring your laptops to lecture tomorrow so you can use them for your term project user study demos.  If your code is not to the point that you can run a user study, or even just demo it, then bring storyboards to use for user study walkthroughs instead.
 
Also, if you were assigned a registration time during lecture, you may pause your activities to register while still in class.  However, if we are taking the quiz then, you?ll have to stop taking the quiz, register, and then continue when you are done registering.  This may require that you stay a few minutes after class to do so, depending on when we take the quiz.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Some of you have submitted deliverable#2 via email rather than via Autolab.
 
If you did that, please submit via Autolab asap (now!).
 
In case there was confusion, I?ve extended the deadline to 11:59pm tonight so you can still submit to Autolab on time.
 
Good luck with it.Hi all.  To help you with your term projects, recitation tomorrow will be converted into all-day bonus CA office hours.  Except for the first two hours, which will be converted into bonus extra sleeping.  So the bonus extra CA office hours run from 10:30am to 5:30pm.
 
I hope you use this bonus extra resource wisely!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  I hope you had a very productive and enjoyable weekend!  We now are in the homestretch, with the term project due in 2 days (just over 61 hours, actually).
 
Here are a few hints at this stage:
 
?         Backup, backup, backup!
Make lots of backups of your entire project (everything, including images, etc).  Maybe one backup per hour.  Keep all your backups until after you submit the term project!


?         Keep Stable Copies
On a related note?  It is possible to effectively wreck a great project by adding an awesome new feature.  How?  By getting it ?almost working?, and in the process breaking everything else, and then having nothing working when it?s time to submit.  This has happened numerous times before.  Don?t let it happen to you!!!  Of course, backups are key.  In particular, though, when things are particularly stable, you should make a special extra backup and label it (something like term-project-rc4.zip, where ?rc? means ?release candidate?).  Then, if it?s Wednesday afternoon and you can?t get your latest, greatest code to work, just fall back to your last release candidate and you?ll be fine.


?         Converge
Now is the time to start converging to a finished product.  Your efforts should be mostly spent on debugging, polishing, and honing what works (or nearly works), and not on building new features (unless the core product is rock-solid and safely backed up in an RC).


?         Engineer Around Problems
Early in the process, you should try to design your way around problems, looking for the richest user experience backed up by the most elegant software design.  Not now.  As you approach the finish line, you may have to make serious adjustments to your plans, adding duct tape and chewing gum where needed to get something working.  For example, if you just can?t get your sprite intersection tests working, then maybe approximate sprites as rectangles or even just circles, and intersect those.  Not as nice, but definitely way better than having nothing working.  Or say you just can?t get more than one sound to play at a time, but that was essential to your gameplay.  Well, now you simply must make changes.  Maybe have the second sound cut off the first sound (better than nothing), or maybe make one of the sounds visual (say, display ?Blam!? and flash the screen a couple times).  You get the idea.  Don?t hold your original design as sacred.  Bend it as you must to get something working now.


?         Leave time for your videos and your submission documents
These take time.  At least several hours, and maybe more, if you hit hiccups.  Don?t work until Wednesday night and leave too little time to make your videos.  These must also be completed by the project deadline.  We will not accept late submissions of videos (or anything else).


?         Leave time for submission problems
These happen.  You will be submitting very large files, and Autolab will probably be very slow around the deadline.  Plan on that.  Slow internet, or a crashed computer, or most any other such issue will not be grounds for an extension.    One thing:  you may make 2 submissions, so you might want to submit early in the evening so that is your worst-case fallback and then submit again later with your final version.


?         Verify your submission
After you submit, exit your browser, then launch a new browser, go back to Autolab, view your submissions, and download your submission file.  Unzip it.  Run it.  Make sure it works.


?         What to do with oversized submissions?
If your submission is too big, you should omit some images or do whatever you need to do to get it down to size, and submit that.  IN ADDITION, you may place a larger zip file with your complete project say on Dropbox and give us a link to that file.  But that is strictly in addition to what you submit in Autolab.  You will be graded on your Autolab submission, though you may demo the larger / complete submission.


?         Do not submit late (you can?t)!
No late submissions will be accepted.  Really.  So if the deadline is approaching, submit.  Submit whatever you have, in whatever form it is.  But submit it.  We will give you partial credit, perhaps a lot of it, but only if you submit!


?         No Heroics!
It?s not clear there ever was time for heroics, but if there was, it has passed.  This is a busy time of year, with lots of other courses and activities going on.  Don?t try to work for the next 61 hours straight.  That?s lunacy.  Just give this the time you reasonably can, given all your other commitments, and do the best given that reality.  And you?ll be fine.


?         Don?t Panic!
Yes, you?ll be fine.  There is not enough time left to drastically change your project.  This is a GOOD thing.  Embrace it.  Accept it.  Do the best you can, but then let it be.  And have some fun.  Really!

 
Good luck, and carpe diem!
Hi all.  A couple Autolab administrivia items:
 
?         quiz3a and quiz3b
In the end, we took 3 versions of quiz3 (the original, the redux, and the second redux), and your scores were basically the top two of those three (so the lowest of the 3 scores was dropped).  To get Autolab to properly account for this, we moved the 3 quizzes into the ?other? category (which does not affect your semester grade).  Then we created two new quizzes, quiz3a and quiz3b, which contain your top and second-top scores on those three quizzes.  Autolab reflects these changes.


?         tp1, tp2, tp3
The term project entries were renamed to tp1 (deliverable1), tp2 (deliverable2), and tp3 (the last one, due Wednesday).  The weights are not right on these yet, but we?ll of course get that setup just-so before we do any end-of-semester calculations.

 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Based on the several requests I?ve received on the matter, tomorrow?s lecture will be truly optional.  We?ll try to provide some interesting material for those who do attend, but none of it will appear on the final and we?ll not take attendance, so you may use that time instead to work on your term projects (or not).
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.   I have to rearrange my OH this week around term project grading (over 300 projects from multiple courses!).
 
Today, I?ll have OH from 1pm to 3pm (longer than usual for Tuesday OH, since the next couple days are mainly devoted to grading).  I?ll also block some time on Friday for more OH (I?ll announce those hours later this week).
 
Good luck wrapping up your term projects!Hi all.  Congratulations on finishing your term projects.  Whew!

As for lecture tomorrow (well, today, Thursday).  It is required, but everyone who attends will get +5 pts bonus on the last quiz. Woohoo!  :-)   In any case, it should also be good fun.  It?s a chance for us all to share in your many varied and really interesting projects.  Unfortunately, we don?t have time for everyone to present during lecture (sorry).   The projects that will be presenting have already been informed via email (this is true for lecture 1; for Kelly?s lecture, you may hear from her very soon if not already).  Please note that we have to select the presenting projects prior to grading all the projects, so while all the projects presenting tomorrow are really well done, it is quite possible (even likely) that some projects that ultimately receive top grades will not be presenting (sorry).  This is a necessary result given the really tight timing, but it?s ok ? tomorrow is not a high-pressure, high-stakes affair.  It is a low-stress time for us to share and have fun.  Sure, we?ll have a little contest among presenters, but really it?s about the sharing and the fun.  Let?s all revel in your collective success!!!!
 
Congratulations again, and?  Carpe diem.Hi all.  So you know: while we will grade the version you submitted for style, design, etc, you do not have to demo that exact version when you have your grading meetings in the next few days.  You may make some very small bug fixes, for example.  But they must be small changes.  You may not add any new features or make any major changes to your code.  But an hour or two of polishing is ok, though surely not required.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Great job on your term projects!!!  And now a brief and well-earned respite:  no recitation tomorrow, and no office hours this weekend.  Next week, I?ll have some office hours and we?ll also have a complete final exam review schedule, which I?ll post when I have it.  Meanwhile, again, kudos on your collective great work!!!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  It is imperative that you do not miss your term project grading
meetings!  This is both out of respect to your mentors, but also to give you
your best chance to get the best grade possible for all the hard work you
put into your projects.  Note that if you do miss your grading meeting, then
you probably will not get another chance at a meeting.  If your mentor can
find a time that works for him or her prior to the Sunday deadline, they may
try to reschedule, but perhaps not.  If no meeting occurs, they will grade
based on your video and the rest of your submission.  Again, it's very much
in your best interests to show up at your grading session.

Carpe diem.Hi all.  As we start wrapping up the semester, please take the time to fill out the TA Feedback forms:
https://www.ugrad.cs.cmu.edu/ta/S13/feedback/
 
We value all of your thoughtful feedback, positive or negative.  We aim to give you the best course possible, and to do that we constantly evaluate what works and what doesn?t, and try to do more of the former and less of the latter, to make positive changes to improve the students? learning experience each semester.  To that end, your feedback is invaluable.
 
Thanks!Hi all.  Please note the following:

?         My Office Hours
I will have OH this week as follows:
Mon: 1-3pm
Tue: 6:30-8:30pm
Thu: 3:30-4:30pm

?         CA Office Hours
Mon thru Thu: 6:30-8 in GHC 5205

?         Final Exam Review Sessions
Note that the alternate sessions are earlier in the day, and are in very small rooms.  They are only for those who cannot attend the evening sessions, which are in Rashid Auditorium and so can accommodate everyone.

Monday May 6, Weeks 1-4
4pm - GHC 4301 (alternate)
9pm - GHC 4401

Wednesday May 8, Weeks 5-7
3pm - GHC 4301 (alternate)
8p - GHC 4401

Thursday May 9, Weeks 9-11
3pm - PH A19 (alternate)
9pm - GHC 4401

Carpe diem!Hi all.  As you likely experienced, the term project gallery is a very helpful resource for many students in this course.   Listing your project in the gallery may also help you more directly, for example by providing a link for possible employers to locate you and your project.  Perhaps.  In any case, we encourage you to participate and list your project, though it is entirely optional and does not influence your grade in any way.
 
If you are interested, please fill out this form asap:
    http://tinyurl.com/crhvfyo
 
Thanks, and carpe diem!Hi all.  I hope your finals are going well!  As part of this week?s semi-craziness, I need to move my OH from tomorrow to Friday, 3-4pm.  That apparently will work better for most folks anyhow.  I?ll also have wrap-up OH next week.  I?ll post those hours later.
 
Again, I hope this week is going well for you.  And I remind you that it?s really hard to drive your grade up by cramming at the last minute, but really easy to make your grade plummet by staying up too late and stressing.
 
So:  study a little, sure, but not too much, not at this point.  Leave time for sleep (lots of it!) and eating right, and some decompressing socializing and exercise.  That?s by far your best bet to do well on your finals.  And to be less stressed.  And happier.
 
Good luck!!!Hi all.  This is a reminder for those students who already have explicit approval via email from me to take the Alternate Final Exam on Saturday.  Be sure to show up with a printed copy of that email (it?s the only way you can take the exam!).  The alternate final exam will be on Saturday, May 11, from 4pm to 7pm, in GHC 4211.
 
If you must take the Alternate Alternate Final, triple-check with me to confirm and you will sit for it on Monday.
 
Thanks.Hi again.  This is for those students who qualify for university-approved extended time on the final exam.  The extended time finals are not proctored by us, but rather by Larry Powell?s office.  To receive the extended time, you must pre-arrange with Larry Powell to take the exam on Friday.  You may instead show up at the regular 8:30am final exam session, but then you will not receive extended time.
 
Good luck!Hi again.  Not to be a broken record, but one last time I?ll urge you to get enough sleep tonight and tomorrow night.  8 hours.  Really.  It?s the very best investment of time you could make for doing well on your finals.
 
I also understand that most of you are generally catatonic at 8:30am.  It?s just not when most college students are at their best.
 
Yet Friday morning 8:30am is when the registrar has said we shall commence our final.  Sigh.
 
So we have to make the best of it.  And for that, you should time shift.  You should already have started the process, but in any case, be sure to do so tonight.  Wake up tomorrow nice and early, say 8am.  That will make you sleepy tomorrow night at a reasonable hour, which is GOOD, so you can get those 8 hours of sleep and still wake up refreshed with ample time to get some breakfast, maybe take in a short walk, and go to the final.
 
Another hint:  do not sleep through the final!  We?ve had it happen, more than once!  Really.  So:  set two alarms, place one far away from your bed so you have to get up to turn it off.  And arrange to meet a friend to walk to the exam.  If you don?t show up, your friend should wake you.  This is a preventable calamity, so prevent it.
 
And another hint:  you?ll generally do better if you are not too warm.  Don?t freeze, but keep yourself ?comfortably cool? (with a light sweatshirt or jacket on hand just in case you do start getting cold).  It helps.
 
And of course:  Keep the stress down.  You are very nearly done with this semester.  Enjoy the last few days of the semester and then have a wonderful summer!!!
Hi all.  Thanks to the tireless efforts of our CA?s, including all of them (and Kelly and me) in a multi-hour late-night grading extravaganza the other day, I am pleased to report that the term projects are now graded and entered into Autolab.
 
And the results are very good!  The median was a rock-solid 91 (wahoo!), and the top score an off-the-charts 107.  Way to go!!!!
 
As for grade issues, you should know that grading term projects is very difficult, seeing as everyone?s is distinct, and that there are so many dimensions on which we grade.  We work very hard to make the grading fair across all mentors and across all different kinds of term projects.  This requires hours and hours of discussions on our part and careful deliberations.  The point being that I am not disposed to changing term project grades, except in the case of obvious and egregious error.  Anything else would in fact result in less fair grading.
 
That said:  after the final, when semester grades are computed, I?ll take the time to carefully review each ?bubble? case, where a semester average is within a very small distance of the next letter grade up (I only check that way, and not for grades that might move down).  This process generally just confirms that our grading has worked all along, but it does give me a chance to catch any possible errors that might affect semester grades at that time.
 
Getting back to your term projects:  I commend you on your collective hard work and excellent results.  You should be rightfully proud of your accomplishments.  Way to go!!!!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  I?ve received some concerned emails about that last message.  It?s fine to open it and read it.  It wasn?t really to Margaret.  It was to you, to inject a bit of levity and humor into this week.  From the emails, it?s clear most of you understood that, but for the few who did not, please take it that way.
 
And you will not be asked to write your own new programming language on the final.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  This is a gentle reminder that the post-recursion lecture topics (except for the last day on programming languages) were not optional and, while they were not on hw?s or quizzes, could indeed appear on the final.  If they did, they?d not be weighted super heavily, and they would not ask the most piercing and subtle questions.  But they may appear.
 
In that they will appear in some form.

Hint, hint?
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  The time has come to declare your 15-112 studies over, put down the books, close the computers, turn off the phones, and head off to the Land of Nod (*).  Get a good night?s rest, wake up invigorated in the morning, and give yourself your best chance tomorrow.
 
Carpe diem.  And in this case, carpe noctem.  And good luck on the exam tomorrow.Hi all.  Please be sure to bring your CMU id to today?s exam.  As we are in several rooms, and not every proctor knows every student, you will need your CMU id to submit your exam.
 
Good luck on the exam today!Hi all.  Thanks once again to our amazing CA?s, and to a large supply of pizza and ribs and caffeinated soda (thanks, Angie!), the final exams are graded and the grades are in Autolab.  And the results are once again very solid.  The median is a very strong 84, and the top score was a ridiculous 111.
 
To compute your score, we first converted one 2-point question into bonus (this was the question about the limitation of lambda functions in Python (it?s that you can only have one expression, no statements), which very few people got right).  We also added a 5-point adjustment to the raw score (the same adjustment as last semester, to maintain statistical correlation between them).  So if and when you see your raw score on your exam, round the score and add 7 points to obtain your adjusted score.  The adjusted scores are the ones in Autolab.
 
And yes, you can see your graded final exam during my office hours, either this Monday (last office hours of this semester), this summer (sporadic, or by appointment), or in the fall, or really for a long time thereafter (I retain your final exams for a long time, and while you may not take them outside of my office, you are welcome to see them at your leisure).
 
I can?t yet compute semester grades because the Alternate Final is today and the Alternate Alternate Final is Monday, plus there are a few other odds?n?ends to tie up.  But I?ll post those just as soon as I can.
 
Meanwhile, kudos again on a solid collective performance on the final exam.
 
Great job!!!Hi all.  Anyone interested in helping out in some way with the very-soon-to-get-started 112+K12 Online Curriculum Development project should fill out this form asap:

http://tinyurl.com/ct95bl8

This is just to get the planning started. I'll send email soon to those who sign up with more details. Thanks!!!

Carpe diem!Hi again.  Please note that my last scheduled office hours of the semester will be this Monday, both from 10am-11:30am and then again from 5:30-7pm.
 
Thanks.Hi again.   Here are some Q?s and A?s regarding semester grades:
 
Q:  Is Autolab correctly weighting grades, with half weight to the lowest 2 quizzes and hw?s, etc.
A:  Yes, it is.  Your semester grade in Autolab is properly computed according to the syllabus.

Q:  Are semester grades rounded up?
A:  Yes.

Q: So 89.5 is an A? 
A: Yes.

Q: How about 89.4?
A: That?s a B.

Q: My grade is within 0.1% of the next letter grade up.  Can?t you just bump the grade?
A: Sorry, no, but please understand:  with so many students, no matter where we draw the line, there will be students just barely under it, well within 0.1% of the next letter grade up.  So we have no choice but for some students to be in this situation.  Of course, we take this seriously, and we are very careful to draw the line as fairly and reasonably as possible, but in the end, it has to be drawn somewhere, and some students will indeed be just barely below it.

Q: What about students ?on the bubble??
A: For students within a few tenths of a point to the next grade, I will personally review their term project grades, and perhaps other grades, too.  This is not to bump their grade, but to see if perhaps there was some small grading error that might have affected their semester grade.  In most cases, there was not, as our CA?s grade very reliably.  But sometimes mistakes do happen, so I look carefully just to be sure.  Since this process takes many hours and results in very small grade changes and then only for very few people, it?s just for students on the bubble, within a few tenths of the next grade up.
 
Q: What about students on the bubble the other way?  Could an 89.5 result in grade changes down to an 89.4?
A: No. I do not review people above the line.  If Autolab says you cleared the line, you did.

Q: I have concerns about my semester grade.  Should I send them to you now?
A: I do care about your concerns, most assuredly, but ask you to please wait at least until I have computed and posted semester grades, either Monday night or Tuesday.  Thanks.
 
Q: What is the median grade?
A: Though it may move just a little, right now the median is 85.7, which is very solid.  Great job!!!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  It is natural and expected for the distribution of the course to vary a bit each semester.  Even so, these variations should stay within reasonable limits.  With this in mind, to keep the overall distribution within historic norms, I have concluded we should add +1 point to everyone?s semester average.  Much as I am impressed by your collective effort and results, this is not a gift, but rather a well-earned and well-deserved adjustment.
 
Your semester average in Autolab now reflects this change.  And after this change, an adjusted 89.5 still rounds to an ?A?.  As for those of you who now find yourself on the bubble, again, please understand that (1) I will carefully review the term project grading of each bubble case; and (2) a line will be drawn and indeed some students will fall just barely below it.

Carpe diem.Hi all.  In tying up loose ends, I finally was able to add the missing code to our lispish.py implementation.  I added ?environments?, which are what we needed to have non-global variables.  I also added some test code.  It?s all posted here:
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112/handouts/lispish.py
 
Check out the end, where the test code implements a recursive fib(n) in our little language we invented.  Very cool!!!!
 
Enjoy!!!
 
Carpe diem.Hi again.  The Term Project Gallery is now online, with dozens and dozens of really nice projects in it.  Great job, everyone!!!  :-) Hi all.  This is the 208th and last course-wide email of the semester.
 
All grading is completed and semester grades have been entered.  You should see them in SIO now.
 
And what a ride it has been!  It has been a great pleasure working with all of you this semester.  And what work you have done!  Your term projects were truly wonderful, and your final exams were very solid.  You are surely ready for what lies ahead, at least if it involves programming.  :-)
 
Looking ahead, please do keep in touch.  I love hearing how students take their hard-won programming skills and put them to good use!  And I very much hope that many of you will do just that!  You now have this powerful hammer.  Go find some worthy nails!
 
I would also like to thank our amazing, wonderful, dedicated CA?s.  They are the backbone of this course, and everything we do would be simply impossible without them.  Special callout to Margaret, who has worked tirelessly all semester doing so many different tasks it boggles the mind.  I really don?t know how she does it (but thank goodness she does!).
 
And of course many thanks to Kelly, who was simply awesome.  Nobody has done more for this course over the past 5+ years than Kelly.  Thanks!!!
 
And, finally, I would like to thank you all.  I am very fortunate to be able to work with so many smart, motivated, and caring students.  You make this job so enjoyable and gratifying for me.  Thanks!!!
 
I leave you with these words, wishing you great success in your quest to live a happy and satisfying life and to make the world a better place:  CARPE DIEM.

5)      My Lecture / 10:30 seating / Andrew id?s of CMA*** to ZWE***
For the rest of those in Lecture 1 taking the exam at 10:30am, with andrew id?s alphabetically between CMA*** and ZWE***, you will take the exam in our normal lecture hall:  DH 2210, starting at 10:30am.


Once again, good luck on the exam!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  These have just been made.  You should be hearing from your mentor sometime today.  Please let me know first thing tomorrow morning if you?ve not heard from your mentor.
 
I will also be sending out more info about the term projects later today.

Cheers.

What is the big-oh of L.count(val)?
Hi all.  We're getting lots of questions about various operations that you should be able to figure out on your own.  So here's how...
 
For example:  what is the big-oh of L.count(val), if L is a list of length n?
 
[Aside: to be clear, that question is fine, but it is phrased "112-style".  The same question outside of 112 would have to be phrased:  what is the big-oh of the worst-case runtime of L.count(val)..."]
 
Well, the only way to count all the occurrences of val in L is to check every single element in L, right?  And there's no way to do that in less than O(n), right?  Think about that.  Be sure you understand it!
 
Now, for each element, we just test if it is equal to val, and if so, we add one to a counter.  All that is O(1), right?
 
So we do an O(1) operation O(n) times.
 
And so...  That should tell you the big-oh.  Right?
 
This result holds true whether or not you write your own version of count, or you use the built-in one, which would be faster (due to it being written in C and compiled), but only by a constant factor.
 
Remember: even the built-in functions and methods still require code, and that code still obeys the big-oh laws....
 
And remember to think about the big-oh of every operation in the code, including the calls to built-in functions.  And figure out for yourself what the big-oh of those functions should be.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Reminder: opt/adv reprise, 1pm today, and opt/adv follow-on at 3pm today
Topic is data compression using Huffmann Coding.   Cool stuff.
 
See @2265 and @2291 for details.
 
All the fun is in GHC 5222.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

For sets: use set(["a", "b"]) and not {"a", "b"} notation
Hi all.  As per the subject line:  both of these notations are fine and legal, but autolab uses a somewhat older version of Python, and the newer {"a", "b"} set notation will not work there.  So use set(["a", "b"]) notation.
 
To create an empty set, use set(), with no parameters.
 
This is just for sets.
 
For maps/dictionaries, you can use the {"a":2, "b":3} notation.
 
David

hw7 autograder is open for business
Hi all.  The autograder is only autograding friendsOfFriends, the rest being manually graded.  But it is live now.  You have 5 submissions this week.  Use them judiciously!
 
Good luck.  :-)
 
And... Carpe diem.
 
David

Big-Oh of various builtin list and set operations
Hi all.  You should use the following worst-case big-oh runtimes of various builtin list and set operations:
 
For LISTS:

List Operation
Big-Oh
copy
O(n)
append
O(1)
insert
O(n)
get a[i]
O(1)
set a[i]=val
O(1)
delete item
O(n)
iterate: for val in a
O(n)
sort
O(nlogn)
contains:  val in a
O(n)
min(a) or max(a)
O(n)
len(a)
O(1)
 
For SETS:
 
Set Operation
Big-Oh
copy
O(n)
add
O(1)
delete item
O(1)
iterate: for val in s
O(n)
contains:  val in s
O(1)
min(s) or max(s)
O(n)
len(s)
O(1)
 
Noting that maps (dictionaries) are based on sets, we can easily determine the costs of their operations, too.  In particular, setting and getting values in dictionaries are both O(1).

Hope this helps.
 
David 

Mandatory style code review meetings (please read)
Hi all.  To be clear: the style code review meetings with your CA's are required!
 
Subject to the two exceptions below (*), by tonight you must have scheduled a meeting with your CA (just the scheduling is by tonight -- the actual meeting can be by Sunday).  Then, you must be on time to your meeting and stay the whole time.
 
If you miss your meeting (and being more than a couple minutes late is the same as missing the meeting), then you will receive a 10-point deduction on hw6, and you will still have to reschedule for another meeting.  If you miss that one, another 10-point deduction, and then a meeting with me.  Nobody wants that, so just don't miss your meetings.
 
Besides, these meetings are good fun.  Really.  And a great chance to get some super-helpful personalized feedback on how to write better code.  So go, and enjoy!!!!
 
Exception #1:  If you are out-of-town, you can meet when you get back. 
 
Exception #2: if you have already missed your meeting at the time of this post (Friday, 4:30pm), since we did not post the specifics until now, then you get a special dispensation:  no penalty!  But:  everything above still applies, so you need to reschedule your meeting today, and not miss that meeting.
 
Again, have fun!!!

David

Sets + Maps: What you need to know
Hi all.  For sorting (well, selection sort, bubble sort, and merge sort, but not insertion sort or quick sort), you need to know everything about them -- how they work, how the Eck simulator works with them, how to write them (or any reasonable variant of them) from scratch, how to analyze their big-oh (worst-case and average-case), etc, etc, etc.
 
But what about sets and maps?  For those, you need to know how to use them, and what the big-oh costs are for all their operators (especially adding an element, accessing an element, and iterating over all the elements), and why they cannot take immutable objects as keys.  You also need to know what a hash function is, and that hash(obj) returns an int that is not necessarily unique but ideally has few collisions in practice.  You do not need to know more about the underlying hashtable implementation than that.
 
So: why did we lecture on it?  Because you did need to be exposed to this (much as we also gave you some exposure to quicksort).  Hopefully, the context makes the O(1) behavior of various set and map operations less mysterious (as they are not mysterious at all).  
 
Also: it gives you a tiny taste of what lies ahead.  That's what data structures and algorithms courses chiefly do.
 
It's just that we will not ask you exam questions on that part of the material (bucket sizes, rehashing, etc).
 
Hope this clarifies things a bit.

Carpe diem.
 
David

hw7 extra bonus problem: O(n) checkNearlySorted()
Hi all.  Please note this tiny, fun addition to hw7:
 
Bonus/Optional: O(n) checkNearlySorted() [1 pt, manually graded] 
Write checkNearlySorted() from quiz5, but here it must be O(n). Have fun!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Attend recitation!
Remember: it's not optional.
 
And: today, the CA's will cover the practical side of big-oh, sets, and maps.  This is really important for hw7 to go well for you.
 
So: be there!!!
 
David

Quiz6 grades
Hi all.  Quiz6 is graded (of course! great work, CA's!), and will be returned today in recitation.  Raw median was a not-so-great 64, and we added +6 to each score (as already reflected in autolab), so the adjusted median is 70.
 
This is not dismal (whew!), and does reflect your hard work.  But in truth it's also not wonderful, or more importantly it's not yet up to our standards for you and this course, and so it reflects that more studying needs to be done (notice the word "yet", underlined for your convenience -- we have total faith that you'll learn this, and learn it well, and soon).
 
The multiple choice in particular went less-than-ideally.  You need to study how Tetris works.  These questions, or others like them, may well appear again in the not-too-distant future.
 
Good thing this coming week is sans hw, leaving you some time shore things up!
 
And for those who are curious:  top scores (plural, because two students achieved them) on quiz6 were 106 (excellent!).
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Midterm extra-time protocol
Hi all.  This is for those students who pre-qualify with the EOS office / Larry Powell for extra time on exams.  The protocol is different for midterms and finals than for quizzes.  We administer quizzes, but Larry Powell's office proctors the midterms and finals.  So, if you pre-qualify for extra time, you need to contact Larry Powell's office directly to arrange for a proctored midterm.  You may instead show up at your assigned lecture time, but then you will have the standard time to complete the exam.
 
Please email me with any questions or concerns about this (or any other) matter.

Thanks.
 
David

Optional/Advanced lecture follow-on
Hi all.  This is chiefly for those who attended yesterday's event (I'm not sure we can call it an optional/advanced lecture, per se)....
 
First, as we discussed, we'll have the next part of the talk Saturday at 3pm in GHC 5222.  Space is limited, so if you missed the first part and want to attend the second, please email me first.  Thanks.
 
Second, here is the extra-fun bonus problem we discussed:
 
0) Work in teams (because N>1 minds are better than 1) (and because it's just more fun that way), say of 2-4 (though this is not a strict requirement).
 
1) Find the point values for letters in Scrabble
 
2) Convert these somehow into letter frequencies (hint: they all must be 0<n<1, and you might as well normalize so their sum is 1) (hint: either do something here so you can also include spaces and punctuation in step 4 below, or in that step you'll need to delete all non-alphabetic characters from the text)
 
3) Using these frequencies, build a Huffmann Coding prefix tree (like we did in lecture)
 
4) Find some large block of seemingly-typical English-language text.  (See hint at end of step 2 above for non-alphabetics)
 
5) Compute the cost of storing the sample text in a fixed-length encoding -- basically, count the total # of letters in your alphabet, then take the ceiling of the log_2 of that number (why?).  This is the number we have to beat to show we actually compressed something.
 
6) Now, compress the text in step 4 using the tree from step 3.
 
7) Compute the bits required in step 6, and show that it's less than step 5.
******  This is the minimum required, but you probably should at least do step 8:
 
8) Uncompress the text from step 6 and show that you get the original text in step 4.
 
9) For fun and for dessert, do the above without importing heapq.  That is, write your own heap.
 
10) For more fun and more dessert, do it with Fibonacci heaps.
 
11) Email me your results.
 
Good luck and have fun!!!
 
David

Optional/Advanced lecture today, 4:30pm in WEH 7500 (reprise Saturday 1pm in GHC 5222)
Hi all.  As the subject line says...
 
As for topics, we may do a quick tour of some fun topics, such as Huffmann compression, solving Krypto and Cryptarithms and SubsetSum with combinatorial iterators, etc.
 
Or maybe we'll write a text adventure (which is a nice use of sets and maps, btw), though maybe we'll reserve that for a hw later this semester (it's a fun, not too hard topic).
 
Or maybe we'll write our own programming language (though maybe not -- that may come later this semester, but we'll definitely eventually do it).
 
Or just eat pizza.
 
You never know.
 
:-)

Carpe diem.
 
David

Two clarifications on hw7 / better-big-oh #5
Hi all.  This is in regards to hw7 / better-big-oh #5.  It is not a change in the assignment, just a couple clarifications / hints to make the problem a bit more approachable, since this is the hard one of the 5.
 
First, this text was added: "Even though [this problem] looks syntactically almost identical to the previous problem, in fact the solution is very different and more complicated."
 
Then, in the text below that point, there was a line that read "This function returns...", where the "this" was perhaps confusing.  It referred to the bisect function at that point.  The writeup has been clarified to read "The bisect function returns...".
 
Hope this helps.
 
David

hw7 is posted
Hi all.  Hw7 is now posted and is due Sunday at 10pm.  Last day to submit with late/grace days is Tuesday at 8pm.
 
As noted in the hw7 writeup: "This hw is somewhat lighter than usual, to give you time to catch your breath and to study for the upcoming midterm."
 
Even so, we highly recommend that you get a jump on it, maybe even finish it by Saturday.   How nice it would be to wake up on Sunday morning afternoon with no 112 on your mind.  :-)
 
Hw8 isn't due until way out on March 22nd, which is like 8 years from now!  So you are so close to a very well-earned break.
 
But for now, let's finish the first half strong.  Lean into the next week, and then take your break.

Of course, don't lean in too hard.  Get your sleep, at least 7 hours every night.  Really.  Easily the fastest way to ruin 8 weeks of hard work is to short your sleep this week.  And exercise regularly, if just 20 or 30 minutes of fast walking each day.  Just be sure to get your heart pumping, and get your stress down.  Exercise is amazing at de-stressing.  So do it!!!
 
In general: tend to yourself.  Keep yourself healthy.  This is a week when you want the strong, vigorous, healthy you showing up.  So be that you!
 
You can do it!!!  And, as always, we are here to help.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Optional/Advanced lecture tentatively moved to tomorrow, 4:30-6:30pm
Hi all.  Due to a time conflict (specifically, this), this week's optional/advanced lecture needs to be rescheduled.
 
It is tentatively moved to tomorrow, 4:30-6:30pm, pending confirmation of a room reservation.
 
I'll post back here when we have more details, including perhaps a topic.  :-)
 
Carpe diem!

David

A giga-clarification
Hi all.  When one makes a giga-clarification, did they make exactly one billion clarifications, or did they make 2**30 (1,073,741,824) clarifications?
 
Answer: the former.  A billion.  Exactly.  Well, unless they are clarifying memory, I suppose.
 
To wit, this Wikipedia article on Binary Prefix sheds light on the issue (including some interesting legal cases that resulted from this confusion).
 
Generally, kilo/mega/giga as powers-of-two is mainly confined to memory sizes.  Other things, including clockspeeds (which was misstated in lecture, oops) are actually powers-of-10.
 
So your 4 gigahertz laptop has a clock tick exactly 4 billion times per second.
 
But your 4 gigabytes of memory are in fact 4 * 2**32 bytes, or 4,294,967,296 bytes.
 
I hope that peta-clarifies things.
 
Yotta carpe diem.
 
David

Study sorting algorithms for Thursday's lecture
Hi again.  This is a reminder that everyone should study how the sorting functions work prior to showing up for Thursday's lectures.  This will involve downloading the jar file from David Eck's xSortLab, and going through the Visual Sorts for insertion sort, selection sort, bubble sort, and merge sort, and going step by step, and being sure you understand and can even predict what each step will do.
 
This is the starting point for Thursday's lecture, which by the way is really, really cool.  Really.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Hw6 (Solitaire) Grace / Late Day & 1-pt bonus for attending tonight
Hi all.  This course is nothing if not a democracy (not really, but it sounds good!), so by popular vote today, it was decided that hw6 Solitaire is still due tonight at 8pm, but you may use 1 grace day or 1 late day (at a 5% deduction, rather than the usual 10%), up until 8pm tomorrow night.
 
Also: if you attend tonight's hw solution / quiz prep session, then you may not submit hw6 after that (for obvious reasons).
 
And: to encourage balanced attendance between tonight and tomorrow night's sessions, for those who do attend tonight's session, you'll receive +1 points of bonus on hw6.
 
That's all for now.  Good luck wrapping up Solitaire!

David

One last post about Tetris copying (please stop asking if you copied!!!!)
Hi all.  Please read this (and please stop posting to piazza about this).
 
We are not interested in every last possible minor infraction.  Really.  That's not what this is about.
 
Some of you wholesale copied large blocks of code.  We are only interested in that case.
 
So here is a handy rule to help you if you are unsure this applies to you:
 
IF (you copied large blocks of code in Tetris)
    THEN:  YES, this applied you
ELSE:
    NO, this does not apply to you.
 
Simple.  Please do not ask if a few lines here or there are a problem (they are not).  Or if talking for a few minutes with a roommate or former 112 student is what this is about (it is not).
 
This is exactly and only about one thing: large-scale, wholesale copying of code.
 
Anyone who did this knows they did it.  Anyone who thinks they didn't do it, didn't do it, and doesn't have to post to piazza about it, or worry about it.  Not a problem.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Tetris citations: two more Q&A (tetris-after-step2.py is ok, online sources definitely are not!)
Hi again.  As we get flooded with these q's, here are some a's:
 
Q: What about tetris-after-step2.py?  Were we allowed to copy that?
 
A: You were certainly allowed to look at it (that's why we posted it, of course), but not copy it.  The piazza post said:  "You should not start from that point, but rather carefully read the writeup, try to solve it yourself, and compare your results to ours in step 2."  That said, step2 is very early, and we are concerned about copy-paste-edit violations that would only result from later on in the writeup.  So, in terms of resubmitting today, you are fine in any case regarding step 2, even if you violated the spirit of the writeup and copied that solution directly (which you definitely should not have done).
 
Q: What about online sources?  I found a version posted online, is that ok?
 
A: No!  Absolutely not!  That is cheating of the first degree!  And we are very aware of these sources.  We use Google, too!  If you Google "fallingPieceRow", for example, you'll find lots of Tetris solutions, that are written exactly for our tutorial.  So you know:  we submit these online solutions, too, to our anti-plagiarism tool.  So if you did that search, and found one, and used it, you should retract your submission, or face serious consequences.  If this applies to you, fix it now, and don't do that again!
 
David

Partner clarification
A student asked:
 
Q: what if we started with a partner, but then stopped, and none of our code was written with that partner.  Do we still have to resubmit listing that partner?
 
A: Clearly, no.  You are fine.  By this description, you didn't really have a partner in the end.  Students who need to include a partner's name are those who collaborated closely with their partner.
 
David

Even more important: resubmit or just retract your copy-past-edited code today!
Hi again.  Some important reading here:
 
First, note that this is not a witch hunt.  We assigned collaborative hw, and we fully expect and want you to collaborate, and closely.  So we expected and we got lots of very similar submissions.  That's all great, and not a problem at all.
 
Restated: if you did Tetris in good faith, as nearly all of you did, without copy-paste-editing code, you are totally just fine. Really.  No worries.  No problem.
 
That said:  if we did the official anti-plagiarism pass right now, some students would fail this course!
 
This post is our one-and-only attempt to avoid that outcome.  Again, we are not talking about the great many of you who did everything right.  That's great.  We are talking about the few of you who violated this part of the writeup: "as always with collaborative work, you must be actively involved in every part of your solution, and you may never simply copy any code from anyone, nor electronically share your code (email, FB, texting, etc) even with your partner."
 
Based on current autolab submissions, we are 100% certain that some of you violated these terms.  Ugh.
 
You have until 10pm tonight to fix this.  You can do so in one of two ways:
 
#1) Resubmit your work without any copy-paste-edited portions.  This may involve eliminating large amounts of your code, but so be it.  It's better than cheating.
 
#2) Simply retract your submission.  You can email me today asking to retract your submissions, and we will do so, no questions asked, no penalty assigned (aside from the usual consequence for not completing a hw, which is paltry compared to the penalty for cheating).
 
Again, if you did this right, you absolutely have no concerns at all, nothing to worry about, just move on and focus on Solitaire.  But if you copy-paste-edited large blocks of your partner's (or anyone else's) Tetris code, then fix this today, right now, or you will face serious consequences that nobody wants.
 
Nobody wants that.  We sure don't.  You sure don't.  So just do the right thing.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Important: Fix your missing Tetris citations by using a grace or late day!
Hi all.  A quick check of the current Tetris submissions shows that most of you who clearly collaborated (as we can easily detect) listed your partners at the top, as strictly required.  Good job!
 
Some of you did not do this, however...
 
For them:  it is absolutely essential that you fix this, and now, before we run the official anti-plagiarism pass.
 
If you had a partner, and you did not clearly list them at the top of your code, then resubmit now, including their name and andrew id clearly right at the top of your submission.
 
Yes, this will use up a grace day or late day, but it is required.  Otherwise, instead of collaborating, you were violating our rules on cheating.  Ugh.
 
So, do this, today, if you haven't already.
 
David

Tetris grace day to 10pm tonight, Solitaire submission opens after that
Hi all.  We noted that Solitaire is due tomorrow at 8pm with no late days or grace days, but we did not say the same for Tetris.  Given the possibility of confusion, we will allow on Tetris grace day or late day.
 
So:
 
* Tetris was still due last night at 10pm.  No change.
* You may submit Tetris up to 10pm tonight for one grace day or late day.
* Solitaire is still due tomorrow night at 8pm.  No change.
 
Also, to avoid accidental submissions to the wrong hw's, we will not have hw6c (Tetris) and hw6 (Solitaire) open for submissions at the same time.  So once we close hw6c at 10pm tonight, we can then open hw6 for submissions (actually, it may not be until later tonight, or even very early tomorrow morning).
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Solitaire is solo (really)
Hi all.  Don't get confused by having just collaborated so much on Tetris.
 
Solitaire is really solo.  Really.
 
You may not look at each other's Solitaire code.  Let's all be sure to abide by this simple rule.
 
And...  Good luck!

David

Great job! Keep at it! And don't stress! And just do your best!
Hey all.  So we're about halfway through this hw cycle, and so far, so good.  You are collectively doing a splendid job!  Kudos!
 
We have 36 Tetris submissions already, and they look really solid.  And from the Piazza traffic and OH reports, it's clear that many of you are working hard, knocking down one step after the next in Tetris, and beginning to converge on a working Tetris.  Excellent!
 
And while Solitaire isn't easy, don't make it into more than it is.  You can do it!!!
 
Some things to bear in mind as we turn the halfway point of this hw:
 
* Remember that this is the hardest hw of the semester.  I believe this is basically as hard as the recursion hw will be, and it is harder than all the other hw's.  So this is it, the top of the mountain!
 
* By volume, this is also probably the largest hw of the semester.
 
* Next week, by contrast, is easier, and way less volume.
 
* The week after that, you're on spring break!!!!  No volume at all!!!
 
* So if you can push for a couple more days, you're set!
 
* And if you can't, then... DON'T!!!!  Do not go through heroics, do not push yourself beyond your limits.  Stay healthy.  Make good decisions.  Sleep.  Eat.  Exercise.  Do your other coursework.  If all that does not leave time to finish hw6, then simply don't.  Just do what you can, as well as you can, and that will be enough.
 
* Remember: each hw is worth about 3% of your semester grade.  But if it came down to it, this could be one of your two lowest hw's, making it worth half that, or 1.5%.  But if you finish Tetris, then Solitaire is just 0.75%.  And if you can get half of Solitaire done, give or take, we're down to around 0.38%.  That's barely one-third-of-one-percent.  It's just not much.  And it's not worth sacrificing your health or well-being or other courses for.
 
* If you can finish Solitaire, and do it well, and keep your balance, then do it!  But if not, then don't.  Just finish what you can, as well as you can.  And go to our solution session, and absorb as much as you can.  That's a fine plan.
 
In any case, I think your collective hard-work and great results are extremely commendable.  It's especially fun to see you bearing fruit, getting working Tetris games.  Woohoo!!!!
 
Good luck with it, and definitely, absolutely keep your balance.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Tetris background soundtrack! (And a cool bonus animation!)
Hi all.  This is optional, and not bonus or for any points.  But some of you have asked (pointedly!) for a way to include the Tetris background soundtrack in your games.  You ask, we deliver!
 
Before we get started, check out this cool animation submitted by one of your classmates as hw bonus!  Really cool!!!  Hopefully inspiring, too!!!!  We'd love to see more work like this!!!  :-)

Now, returning to the subject at hand...  The "real" way to play audio in Python is using PyAudio, or PyMedia, or GStreamer, or many other powerful but complicated libraries you can find and (try) to install and get working.  If you can, great.  Just not for hw6.
 
Here, we provide a super lightweight way that mostly works.  It may not work everywhere (and if not, our apologies, it is what it is).  And it's not a general-purpose audio player.  But we've tested this for Tetris on Windows, Mac, and Linux, and so far it has worked everywhere.  Woohoo.
 
First, you have to download a just-updated version of eventBasedAnimation.py -- this is version 1.09, and it includes a new quitFn that we need in order to stop the music from running forever, even after we close the window!  This version also lets us exit apps by hitting ctrl-c in the console.  Cool.
 
Next, you need to read and test the newest addition the event-based animation notes:
    * 20. Background audio demo (and using quitFn)
Be sure to download simpleAudio.py and sample.wav so that the example works.
 
Now, if you want to include background audio in your Tetris game, in your init fn, include this line:
    simpleAudio.startSound("tetris.wav", async=True, loop=True)
 
And then in your quit fn (yes, you need one), include this line:
    simpleAudio.stopSound()
 
 
Now, you will need tetris.wav.  You can find your own version online, but we cannot post one on the course website (sorry).  I am not an IP attorney, but by my understanding of Fair Use laws, we can give you a download link here (tetris.wav) to one we found online (which also claims to be free to download).  I believe you are free to use this for educational purposes, to submit your hw6 in particular, but definitely not for any other reason, including posting it online or otherwise making it available to anyone outside of this course, so be sure not do to that.
 
When we grade your Tetris submission, in addition to the latest/greatest version of eventBasedAnimation.py, we will also include simpleAudio.py and tetris.wav at the same level as your tetris program, so you should not submit those.
 
Again, this is 100% optional and just for fun, not points.
 
Enjoy!!!!
 
And...  Carpe diem.

David

hw5 grades released
Hi all.  Hw5 grades were just released.  The median was a solid 89.3.  Good job!
 
So you know:  in hw6, we will grade style in person in 1-on-1 meetings with CA's.  You'll see more details here later this coming week.  Since this takes a huge amount of time, we conserved some time in our hw5 style grading, and only graded some style categories there (thus perhaps driving up your style grades a wee bit, but I doubt anyone would be overly upset by that!).  The comments in your hw5 style grading will make this clear.
 
Meanwhile, I hope Tetris is clicking along, and that you are soon to get going on Solitaire!

Carpe diem.
 
David

hw6c (Tetris) is in Autolab, in "etc" category (not "hw" category)
Hi all.  When you submit Tetris tomorrow (or today, if you wish!), you will submit it to hw6c (the "c" is for "collaborative").  That is not in the usual "hw" category, but rather in the "etc" category.  Don't worry, it's still hw.
 
When you submit Solitaire on Tuesday, do NOT submit it to hw6c, but rather submit that to "hw6", which will be in the "hw" category as usual.
 
This is to keep Autolab plumbing and accounting right.  You can ignore the category thing, but this post is just so you don't get confused if you notice the "etc" thing.  It's fine.
 
To further avoid confusion, while we have installed "hw6c" so you can submit Tetris, we won't install "hw6" until after the Tetris deadline.
 
Good luck with Tetris and Solitaire!

David

Line limits hint
Line limits do apply, but you can also use helper functions.  Something like this:
 
def myInitFn(data):
    doSomeStuff()
    doMoreStuff()
    myInitHelperFn(data)
    andDoEvenMoreStuff()
 
def myInitHelperFn(data):
    blah()
 
David

Test functions (or not) this week
Hi all.  While we encourage you to write test functions where possible, and indeed it IS possible to do so this week, it's also complicated to do that with event-based animations.  Just this week, we'll let you be your own test functions (so you can test things visually, rather than automatically).  So we will not include test functions this week only in our style grading.
 
Even so, where possible use them, since they are such a good idea.
 
Good luck with the hw.
 
David

Updated Tetris writeup (same problem, new writeup, and some important hints)
Hi all.  As promised, the new updated Tetris writeup is now available here.  Enjoy!
 
Important notes and hints:
 
* Same exact problem
This is no change whatsoever in the problem statement, so if you are done with Tetris, you can ignore this post.  This is only a change in the writeup to make it clearer, by eliminating references to old frameworks, and making all references to our current framework.
 
* Important debugging hint
This is on the first page: "Important debugging hint: remember that you can use the built-in ctrl-commands of our event-based animation framework. Critically, these include ctrl-r to reset, ctrl-p to pause, ctrl-s to step while paused, and ctrl-g to go (un-pause). These can be invaluable when trying to debug animations."
 
* Another important hint (solution to step 2)
The writeup now includes a sample solution after step 2.  You should not start from that point, but rather carefully read the writeup, try to solve it yourself, and compare your results to ours in step 2.  You do not have to use our code or write yours exactly like ours, so there can be small differences.  But we provide the step 2 sample solution so everyone is on the same page at that point.
 
* Remember to download the updated eventBasedAnimation.py!
As per @1832, it's really important that you do that, and use version 1.08.
 
Hope this helps!

David

New eventBasedAnimation.py to download, version 1.08 (important!)
Hi all.  Version 1.08 was just released, and you will want to use it now for your Tetris and Solitaire hw.  It fixes an important bug concerning redrawing after mouse and keyboard events, and adds a couple nice-to-haves, like better fonts in error messages and making the window non-resizable.  But the bug fix is critical.
 
Here is the download:
    http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112/notes/eventBasedAnimation.py
 
Be sure when it runs it prints out version 1.08.
 
Enjoy!
 
David

Quiz5 grades are posted
Hi all.  Our always-prompt CA's got quiz5 graded for return today at recitation (thanks, always-prompt CA's!!!).
 
The results were....  Really solid!!!  The median was a robust 78.5, which is darn good for a quiz.  Huzzah!!! You all did especially well on the free response, with a median around 90% there.  Kudos!   Of course, that suggests more practice on CT and RC is in order, though with medians of 70 and 75 respectively on those, things are pretty good right now there, too.
 
Here is a histogram of quiz5 grades (and thanks, Jordan, for generating this):
 

 
Nice job, everyone, and good luck again on hw6.
 
David


Optional Tetris partner and semi-remote-peer-tutor signup form
Hi all.  Please check out this Optional Tetris partner and semi-remote-peer-tutor signup form.
 
Students who fill out the top half of this optional form will be assigned a partner for Tetris (if possible). Once assigned, though, this is no longer optional, since your partner will then be depending on you to work together as a team. Of course, that should be a win-win for both of you!
 
Have fun!!!
 
Somewhat separately, in the bottom half of the form, we have a couple students who are presently working on Tetris but cannot be on campus this weekend. They are seeking Tetris team partners, too, but since it is a more complicated situation (Skype and all), we are handling it independently. We are looking for some volunteers who would be something between normal partners and remote peer-tutors for them. So this is ideal for someone who is already on their way with Tetris, or feeling confident about it in any case, and wants to help someone else. I'll provide more specifics to students who are assigned this role. For now, we're just looking for sign-ups (and note that we may or may not be able to match each sign-up with a partner in this case).
 
Addendum:  given the special nature of this, you may be on one local 2-person team for Tetris, yet separately also be a partner/remote-peer-tutor.
 
Thanks!
 
David
 
Updated Tetris writeup in the morning
Hi all.  So we've used different frameworks numerous times, and we sometimes do and often do not update the Tetris writeup, which is to say that more often than not, students adapt the Tetris writeup to the current framework.  This has never been a problem in the past.
 
For some reason, based on preliminary feedback, this is giving you some serious grief this semester.  I don't know why, but that seems to be the case.
 
Alas....  We'll update the Tetris writeup to reflect the current framework.  It will be posted tomorrow morning.  It will be the same except that the function calls, use of data.xyz, etc, will be in terms of this week's event-based animation framework.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

How to get started... (Don't panic! Don't dive into Tetris! Do study first!!!)
Hi all.  Some students are a bit overwhelmed at the moment, unsure how to proceed.
 
So here is how:
 
1) Get a Tetris partner now if you haven't already.  Ideally, also be study partners, doing all the steps below together as much as possible.
 
2) Study wordSearch until you can do it reasonably well without referring to the notes.  That's good practice for 2d lists and top-down design.
 
3) Thoroughly study each of the demos from today's lecture on event-based animations.  Be sure you understand every one of them thoroughly, including the larger demos at the end.  Ideally, write each of these from scratch.
 
4) Go to tonight's hw6 prep session.  There, you'll cover Snake and War.  Snake is an arcade game that has many similarities to Tetris (board is 2d grid of cells, key-based input, timer-based motion, etc).  War is a card game that show some important elements you'll need for Solitaire (we're even modifying the design to use ragged 2d lists, just to make it even closer).   If you absolutely must miss tonight, be sure you know someone who attends, and who will meet with you and carefully review the material soon after.
 
5) Go to recitation tomorrow.  There, you'll cover the solutions (outright solutions!) to the two hardest parts of Tetris.  You'll also review random.shuffle and random.seed, among other things.  Essential stuff.
 
6) Ok, now you should be ready to start Tetris in earnest.  So: do it. Get going on Tetris.  This will probably be sometime tomorrow afternoon.  Try to get way into it, maybe even finish it, tomorrow.  Otherwise, finish Saturday for sure!
 
7) And finally...  Solitaire.  You can do it!!!!
 
Start early, go to OH, use piazza.  You can do it!!!
 
Good luck!!!!
 
David 

Tetris Group Formation @ OH tonight on the hours!
Hi all.  For those of you who do not have a Tetris partner, but want one:  go to OH tonight.
 
Specifically, try to be there on the hour -- that is, at 6pm, or 7pm, or 8pm, or 9pm.
 
The CA's there will help organize any interested parties at that time into Tetris groups.
 
Good luck!!!!
 
David

hw6 is posted
Hi all.  Hw6 is now fully posted.  As we discussed in class, it has two parts:
 
* Tetris, which is collaborative, and due Sunday at 10pm.
 
* Solitaire, which is solo, and due Tuesday at 8pm.  No late days or grace days.
 
It is very, very important that you very, very carefully read the writeup.  Very carefully.  Before starting.  Now, even.
 
Also, tonight's hw prep session is especially highly recommended, as is recitation tomorrow (seeing as we will outright give you the answer to two hard parts of Tetris).
 
Good luck and have fun!
 
David

My OH today --> 1:30pm to 3:30pm
Moved back 90 minutes, that's all.  :-)
 
David

hw6 status and due date (partial) adjustment
Hi all.  While we'd like to think that Thursday lectures are helpful every week, it's also true that most of you can get some sort of head start on the hw on Wednesday, the day it is posted.  Sure, most of you don't, which is quite fine (since maybe you are studying for the quiz, or maybe just attending to other courses and even non-academic matters).  But you could.
 
This week is different.  The lecture material tomorrow is entirely required to get anywhere on the hw.  So posting today is really not helpful.  And so: we will post the hw tomorrow, and it will be due later than usual (well, mostly).
 
To be more precise:  the hw has two parts.  Part 1 is to write Tetris collaboratively (in teams of two), using our extensive writeup as guidance, and using our additional extensive hints in recitation this week.  That part is still due Sunday at 10pm.  Part 2 is to write another game solo (in teams of one), with a less-extensive-but-still-very-helpful writeup.  That part is due Tuesday at 8pm (but without grace days or late days, so all submissions are due Tuesday at 8pm).
 
This will all be spelled out in detail in the official hw post tomorrow morning.
 
Meanwhile, I hope you attend tonight's movie!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
 
My OH today actually end when advertised (2pm)
Hi all.  Usually, my OH run at least until 3pm, often even to 6pm or later.
 
Not today (sorry).  I have to end my OH at the officially advertised time of 2pm today.
 
Still hope to see some of you there!

Carpe diem.

David

Autolab Grace Day / Late Day accounting issues
Hi all.  Several of you have inquired about Autolab's accounting for Grace Days and Late Days.  And it in fact appears that there are some irregularities going on.   Rest assured that we're on it, and we'll get it figured out asap.  Also, we will eventually get Autolab to follow our course policy as stated in the syllabus, or if we just can't do that (sigh...), then something more liberal than our policy.  Under no circumstances we will allow Autolab to enforce anything less liberal than what the syllabus says.
 
Eventually, that is.  This may take a few days to sort out, particularly as it may require some changes made by the Autolab team.  At this time, we just don't know.  But we're on it!!!
 
Sorry for the confusion, and thanks for your understanding.  :-)
 
David

Halfway!!!
HI all.  I hope hw5 went well for most of you.  The lighter OH queues suggest that it may have been so.
 
So where are we now?  Well, you have just completed 5 weeks of material and 5 hw's.  Woohoo!!!  And so far, the median grade is a super-high 88.7, so nearly half of you have A's at this moment.  Woohoo**2!!!
 
What else:  we have 2 more weeks of content (weeks 6 and 7), then a long time off.  There is no new material in week 8 (just midterm review and then the exam), and the following week is Spring Break (during which the course is entirely shut down).  So you have hw due this Sunday, and next Sunday, but then not again for 3 whole weeks!!!
 
And there's this:  after spring break, we only have 3 more weeks of regular lecture + hw's (weeks 9-11).  Week 12 is like week 8 -- midterm review and exam.  After that, it's term projects (and Carnival!), so no more hw's or quizzes.
 
So that means there are 10 total weeks of lecture + hw, and you have finished 5 of them.  So you are now HALFWAY done with the main material.  And chiefly due to the kindness of the calendar, the second half is paced better, what with midterms and spring break spreading things out.
 
So, even though some harder material lies ahead, in some real sense you've made it past the hard part.
 
Let's not get carried away -- there is much work left to be done.  But you all can be rightfully proud of how very much you've accomplished so far!!!

Kudos again.  Now: let's strap our helmets back on and get back to it.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

The Imitation Game, Wed, 6:30pm, McConomy (optional, non-112 event)
Hi all.  This is entirely optional and can be ignored.  That said, please note that in lieu of an optional/advanced lecture this week, we encourage all of you to attend a special screening of The Imitation Game (see official invite below), this Wednesday at 6:30pm in McConomy, brought to you by the School of Computer Science (thanks, SCS!), with support from The Weinstein Company (thanks!).  Be sure to bring a valid campus ID.
 
This movie chronicles the life of Alan Turing, perhaps the single most notable computer scientist ever, and truly a remarkable person worthy of much fame and honor.
 
Enjoy!!!!
 
David
 
Handy-dandy hint #1602: How to traverse lists of tuples of data
Hi all.  This handy-dandy hint should help you write cleaner code in some cases:
 
# How to traverse lists of tuples of data:

dogs = [("dino", 7), ("fido", 8), ("spot", 3)] # list of (name, age)

print "The least-good way to traverse the dogs list:"
for i in xrange(len(dogs)):
    name = dogs[i][0]  # yuck (the [0] index is confusing!)
    age = dogs[i][1]  # double yuck
    print "  ", name, " is ", age, " years old."
print

print "A better way to traverse the dogs list:"
for dog in dogs:
    (name, age) = dog
    print "  ", name, " is ", age, " years old."
print

print "An even better way to traverse the dogs list:"
for (name, age) in dogs:
    print "  ", name, " is ", age, " years old."
print
 
Carpe diem!

David

hw5 autograder is live (remember: only 5 submissions!)
Hi all.  Subject line says it all.
 
Use those 5 submissions judiciously!!!

Carpe diem.
 
David

Be sure not to miss the added 10-pt problem #0 on hw5!!!!
Hi again.  I am reminding you about @1442, as the youtube logs show that most of you have not yet looked at the videos, and of those that did, most only looked at the first of the three of them.
 
Please be sure to carefully watch all three videos, and then to include the solution in your hw5 submission.
 
We're basically just giving you 10 free points while promoting some much-needed studying on your part, but you do have to actively take them to get them.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Be sure to show up, on time, to your CA-led sessions!
Hi all.  Our CA's are awesome, as you know.  They really are.  And they really, really want to help you, and would go to great lengths (and routinely do) to do so.
 
But...  They also are super-busy CMU students, just like you are.
 
Point being:  It's just not fair to them for you to set up an appointment, or sign up for a small-group session, and then for you to show up late, or to just not show up at all.

Please be more respectful of their time, and also be more efficient with your time.

Among the many supports and course-related events we offer, easily the most efficient use of your 112 time is to be in small-group sessions with our awesome CA's.

So definitely do continue to sign up, but then be sure to show up, on time, every time, ready to learn and to have some fun doing it.
 
Thanks!

And...  Carpe diem.
 
David

hw5 update (required reading)
Hi all.  Given that most of you struggled with the phased animation on quiz4 (even after doing a much-harder phased animation worth half the points of hw4...), we have added one more required problem to hw5.  It is problem 0, it is worth 10 pts, and it involves watching a video step-by-step solution of the quiz4 animation problem, and then writing that solution yourself.  Total time should be about 30-45 minutes, particularly as you have the answers in-hand (they are in the video).
 
Also, so you know:  to make room for these 10 pts, the two 15-point problems were also reduced to 10-pts each.
 
Good luck with it.

David

quiz4 grades
Hi all.  Quiz4 grades are now posted in autolab.  As a modest boost, we re-weighted the two problems to 50/50 rather than 60/40 (except for the very few of you who did better on the animation than the strings problem).
 
David

Exceptions not in week 5
Hi all.  Some of you may have noticed that Exceptions were listed as a topic this week, but we never talked about them.  No worries, we also just moved the topic to next week (or later).
 
So: you do not need to know Exceptions this week, not for hw5, not for quiz5, not at all.
 
Cheers.
 
David

hw3 bonusFunAnimation entries (serious fun)
Hi all.  Sorry for all the posts.  Busy day.
 
So we can all share in the fun, here is a link to some of the hw3 bonusFunAnimation submissions we received.  (We received a few more, but these are the ones who gave us permission to post course-wide.) (And, these are anonymized, as some included identifying info in their gifs.)
 
And... These were all made using only Tkinter, and without images!  And..  Thanks to Jordan for writing the script to convert step animations into animated gif's.
 
We'll vote on the winners today in each lecture.  You might want to peek at these before class, since we won't have much time for this during lecture.  And Klondike Bars are at stake here, so we'd better get it right!!!  :-)
 
Seriously, these are seriously cool.  And they capture something important about 112, and more generally (I hope) about your academic studies and even your entire professional life:  HAVE FUN.  By that I mean: have serious fun, doing something serious, but still, while having fun.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Optional peer tutor sign-up form (seeking both tutors and tutees)
 
Hi all.  At this point, some of you could use some extra tutoring, while some others have gained sufficient mastery to start providing some tutoring.  Here, we put these two groups together, optionally, for those who are so inclined.  In particular, we hope enough of you volunteer to tutor so that everyone requesting a tutor can have one.
 
Please fill out this optional form if you are interested in either providing or consuming peer tutoring for 112. Peer tutors will be assigned 1 or perhaps 2 students, and both parties are expected to meet, in a public location such as the Citadel Commons or a CMU library, at least once per week for around an hour (though the exact details are left to you to figure out). Note that peer tutors absolutely may not work on or discuss the currently-assigned hw. This is not hw help, and this rule is absolute. Instead, peer tutors are another great way for you to study the material, to review the notes, to do practice problems, and to cement your understanding of the core material before you dive into the hw. As for peer tutors, this is a great way for you to reinforce your understanding (the way to truly know something is to teach it), and to do a social good for our community of learners.
 
While we may not be able to accommodate everyone's request, we'll certainly do our best!

Carpe diem.

David

Optional section exchange (form due today!)
Hi all.  Some of you may wish to change section/recitation assignments (for scheduling issues or any other reasons you may have).   If you are in that group, please fill out this optional form today (now, really).

Note that sections A-M correspond to Lecture 1 (10:30am) and sections N-T correspond to Lecture 2 (3pm), and you need to attend the lecture that matches your assigned section, so be sure to take this into account.

We may not be able to accommodate every request, but we will do our best. In any case, the changes will be emailed to affected students before tomorrow's recitations.

Note that these changes may be made only internally to 112, and SIO may show you still in the originally-assigned lecture + recitation.   Even so, be sure to attend the recitation that we have assigned you to, not the one the registrar thinks you are in (though for 95% of you, those are the same).

Carpe diem.

David

Mindfulness Meditation, today, noon, CUC Dowd
This forwarded message below is not a 112 event, and you can safely ignore this entire post (though I hope you read it).  Even so, I highly recommend that you attend this event, and more generally that you be mindful.  Be mindful of what makes you stressed, and what makes you de-stressed.  Be mindful of life patterns that work well for you, and be mindful of life patterns that work poorly for you.  And, of course, do more of the first type and less of the second.  Be mindful of what you really care about in life, and then be mindful that your actions correspond to your priorities.  Be mindful of who you love and care for, and then be mindful to show your love and caring for them.  Be mindful of doing these things every day, and not just occasionally.  Mindfulness is a good thing.  Be mindful about being mindful.
 
Live well and be well.
 
David

hw5: histogram edit (0 --> 00)
Hi all.  Thanks to some eagle-eyed students for catching this:  we also introduced a small error in the histogram writeup (sigh), which is now fixed (since the writeup introduced a contradiction with the original writeup (whoops)).
 
Note that every numeric label in every range must have two digits.  So you can't have 0-9, but rather 00-09.  And you can't have 0-19, but rather 00-19.  For those of you who already solved this, this requires that you make a small and simple change which you should be sure to do, since the autograder will enforce the updated spec.  Sorry again for the confusion, and good catch!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

quiz2 score changes
Hi all.  As many of you figured out already, we made a clerical error when posting the quiz2 deltas from quiz3 (see @1080).  Basically, we got it exactly backwards, and the only students who saw increases on quiz2 were the ones who did worse on quiz3's loops-and-conditionals FR.  Oops (and sorry!).
 
We just fixed this for everyone.  For 280 of you, this results in an increased quiz2 score, on average of 10 points.  For the 83 of you who previously saw an increase, that was just a clerical error, again our apologies, but we have fixed that so you are back to your original, earned quiz2 score.
 
We will not take away the adjustments, though, which together with this change leads to the super-high median of 82 on quiz2.  What a deal!
 
Anyhow, sorry for the confusion, and glad we got that cleared up!  :-)

Carpe diem.

David

Correction about the free money thing
Hi all.  It appears that the bit about the free bags of cash was just a false rumor someone started.
 
But there will be buckets full of free knowledge for the taking, guaranteed!
 
See some of you soon.  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David

Free money today at optional/advanced lecture!!!
Hi all.  Word is that we will be giving away large bags full of cash today at the optional/advanced lecture.  Something like $10k or such.
 
Free money?!?  What a great idea!!!!
 
See some of you there!!!!

David

hw5 is posted
Hi all.  Hw5 is now posted, due Sunday 10pm, last submission Tuesday 8pm (all as usual).
 
Hw5 has a bunch of shorter problems and a couple medium problems, so despite the larger overall number of problems, most of you may find it to be easier/shorter than hw4.
 
Even so, it's best to take it seriously and get an early jump on it.  Why not be entirely done by Saturday night, and wake up Sunday morning without hw5 on your mind?  Nice...

That will give you time to think about your term projects, of course!!!  :-)

In any case, as always, do not start the hw before you have first really studied and practiced and learned this week's material.  That is the key to doing well in this course.  And there are a bazillion practice problems posted for you to, well, practice on.  So: practice, practice, practice.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

factoids du jour (import antigravity / 19 years of computer supremacy)
Hi all.  I hope you are having a lovely morning, or at least dreaming about having a lovely morning (it being 5:45am, which in Standard Student Time is basically the middle of the night).
 
For fun today, try this:
   * Run Python
   * import antigravity
 
Then peek at these (chosen randomly among thousands; hit the "random" button lots of times...):
 
Python
http://www.xkcd.com/353/
 
Random Number
http://xkcd.com/221/
 
Matrix Transform
http://xkcd.com/184/
 
Code Talkers
http://xkcd.com/257/
 
Security
http://xkcd.com/538/
 
Oh, and there's this fun factoid:  the Computer History Museum in Mountain View (Silicon Valley) maintains a fine website, including a page on "This Day in History" of computing, which for today says two things:
 
 * 67 years ago today (in 1948, 8 years before Guido von Rossum was born), IBM started building an amazing-for-its-time new computer which contained 21,400 relays and 12,500 vacuum tubes.  It was way, way less powerful than your watch (probably even if you don't own a watch).
 
 * A mere 48 years later, and 19 years ago today (in 1996, around when most of you were born (give or take), and 5 years after Python was born, and a couple years before Google was born), we made it from a huge box of vacuum tubes all the way to computers scoring their first-ever win over a chess master, as IBM's Deep Blue chess computer defeated world champion Garry Kasparov.
 
History is fun.  Computation is fun.  History of computation is fun**2!
 
Enjoy your lovely days!!!!
 
David

Tuesday/Wednesday Evening Session Format Change
We are going to be changing the format of the Tuesday and Wednesday evening WEH 7500 sessions for the remainder of the semester. Now, both will have homework solutions and quiz prep. The schedule will be as follows (and we'll do our best to keep to this)
 
Tuesday
8-9: homework solutions
9-10: quiz prep
 
Wednesday
8-9: quiz prep
9-10 homework solutions
 
The material for each of these will be identical. As such, you can attend either session and shouldn't have to go to both.
 
Thursday sessions will still be homework prep.
 
Enjoy!

hw4: do not use lists
Hi all.  There are many posts asking for a clarification about this, so here you go.  But technically this is not a clarification, just a reiteration, but hopefully it will still provide some clarity.
 
Basically, it's just as the writeup says:  "you may not use constructs we have not yet covered (lists, sets, maps, recursion, etc)."  There you go.  No lists.
 
The only exception is the one we mentioned explicitly in lecture:  you may use str.split() and str.splitlines(), because these are really string things, not list things, and they can be used in a for loop without really thinking about lists.  That's why.
 
Again, however, you may only them in a for loop, as such:

    for line in s.splitlines():
        ...

In particular, you may not assign the result of split or splitlines into a variable, like so:
 
    a = s.splitlines()  # not allowed on hw4
 
Also, you may not use any list indexing (slicing, but on lists instead of strings).  So in particular, you may not do this:
 
    s = s.splitlines()[2]  # not allowed on hw4
 
Or this:
 
    s = s.split(",")[2]  # also not allowed on hw4
 
The only use of lists is implicit, not explicit, by using split or splitlines in a for loop.  That's it.
 
Hope that helps.
 
David
 
 
hw4 autograder is live
Hi all.  As the subject says.
 
Remember: 6 submissions this week.  Use them wisely!
Test thoroughly before submitting even once!
Do all the problems before submitting even once!
Be sure that all your autograded functions, and their helper functions, are above the #ignore_rest line.
Be sure everything else, including your test functions and your graphics/animation functions and their helper functions, are below the #ignore_rest line.
Do not have any top-level code besides defs and imports above the #ignore_rest line.
Resist the urge to rapid-fire resubmit.  Think, fix, and verify before resubmitting.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

quiz2 and quiz3 grades
Hi all.  In general, when you get your graded quiz back, it has a raw grade on it.  We sometimes make a small adjustment as appropriate to the raw scores to keep the median in keeping with your collective performance and with historical norms.  Autolab always has your adjusted grade, not your raw grade.
 
For quiz3, we added +6 points, so that the adjusted median was 75.  This was a good showing after 3 weeks.  There's room for growth, but so far so good.  Nice job!
 
For quiz2, we just made two additional changes.  First, as advertised: for those who did better on quiz3's eitherIsPrefix than on quiz2's sameDigits, we added the difference in scores to quiz2.  This led to 83 increased scores, with an average increase of 9 points, and a max increase of 30 points.  In addition, for everyone, we added an extra +4 points.  So with all that, the adjusted median on quiz2 (which is now in autolab) was 70.
 
Noting that your lowest 2 quiz scores are automatically half-weighted, the median quiz average is now 77.
 
Overall, the median course average is over 92.  This is artificially high because we've not had any exams, and homework is worth 3x quizzes.  Even so, it shows that you all have been working very hard and learning a great deal so far.  The numbers back it up.

We have a long way to go, but we have come a long way already, and you have grown considerably as programmers already.  Let's keep the momentum going through hw4 and quiz4 and beyond!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
Davd

Hint for finding the bounding box around an individual letter in a string
Hi again.  This is something you have to do in the step animation for hw4.  If you've done it, kudos!, and move on, nothing useful to read here.  But if not...
 
You have the textSize function we provided, which tells you the width of a string in a certain font.
 
You could use it to find the widths of some *substrings* of that string.  Then you could use the difference of those widths to determine the width of an individual letter.
 
Similarly, you could find the left edge of a centered text if you knew its center position (which of course you do) and its width.  Right?  And then you could use the left edge and the width-to-the-kth-character to find the left edge of the kth-character.
 
That's it.  Hope it helps.
 
Good luck!
 
David

TartanHacks extension requests
Hi all.  For those of you doing TartanHacks:  if you are all-in, really contributing all-out to a TartanHacks team, then you may email Anqi (acong) with the team's details (nature of project, etc), and you will receive a 1-day extension on hw4.  And good luck!!!

David

leastFrequentLetters hint
Hi all.  Handy dandy hint here for you:
 
One standard way to do leastFrequentLetters produces a string of unsorted letters, which you then have to sort.  But sorting is complicated, and without lists it's unpleasant.  You should not do it this way.  However, fortunately, it's not needed, because...
 
There is another straightforward way to do this so that you generate the string in sorted order to begin with.  So no sorting is necessary.
 
How?
 
Hmmmm.....
 
But this is a hint that you want to think about how to generate the result string so that it is constructed in sorted order.
 
Good luck with it.

David

hw4 fully posted (and a hint)
Hi all.  Like the subject line says...  It's just as the pre-release, but with two smaller string problems, and some fun bonus.
 
Enjoy!!!
 
Also, be sure to read the hint in the writeup about patternedMessage:
 
5) For patternedMessage, again solve it how you wish, but...  My sample solution did not use replace in any way.  Instead, I built up the result character by character.  I started with an empty string, and just kept adding the next character to it.  How did I determine the next character?  Using both the message and the pattern in some way....
 
Don't use replace() there.  It's not a good way to do it!  Remember to use Polya 2, and think how you would solve it manually, without Python, and only then translate it into Python.
 
Good luck.
 
And... Carpe diem.
 
David

Optional poll (please do participate!) on time spent in last days
 
 
Hi all. Here is a link to an optional form. Please fill it out asap (now is a perfectly wonderful time to do that!) and please try to be fairly accurate. This can help us adjust our resources to best serve you in the coming weeks.  Everything on this survey refers to the past 7 days in total.
 
Thanks!!!!  :-)

And...  Carpe diem.
 
David

hw4 pre-release
Hi all.  While most of you are studying for the quiz tonight, some of you may be getting a jump on hw4 (of course, first you should be certain to thoroughly understand the notes and the practice problems, but if you do, then this is for you).
 
1) Do f14-quiz4 (usual rules apply).
 
2) Do patternedMessage from s14-hw3 
 
3) Do the kineticTextAnimation as described in this video.  Here is a second video that just shows the animation without pauses or voiceover.  To do this, you must use v1.03 of stepAnimation, which you can download from here.  The change is that this version allows you to provide extra keyword parameters to your animation function.  The video shows this in more detail.  Here also is a simple example showing how you can provide extra parameters now to the animation function:
 
###############################
import stepAnimation
from Tkinter import *

def kwArgsDemoAnimation(canvas, width, height, step, text, color):
    left = step % width
    top = 20
    font = "Arial " + str(step%100) + " bold"
    canvas.create_text(left, 20, text=text, font=font, fill=color, anchor=NW)

stepAnimation.run(kwArgsDemoAnimation, width=400, height=90, timerDelay=10,
                  text="Fantastic!", color="brown")
###############################
 
Also, you'll need to use the textSize function, which will be added to the course notes and explained in lecture tomorrow.  But no need to wait, as here it is, and it's being used to extend the previous example so that now it draws a rectangle around the string:
 
###############################
import stepAnimation
from Tkinter import *

def textSize(canvas, text, font):
    # Note that tkFont.Font.measure(text) and tkFont.Font.metrics("linespace")
    # were both unreliable, producing wrong results in some cases.
    # This is crufty, but seemingly works...
    temp = canvas.create_text(0, 0, text=text, anchor=NW, font=font)
    (x0, y0, x1, y1) = canvas.bbox(temp)
    canvas.delete(temp)
    return (x1-x0, y1-y0)

def textSizeDemoAnimation(canvas, width, height, step, text, color):
    left = step % width
    top = 20
    font = "Arial " + str(step%100) + " bold"
    canvas.create_text(left, 20, text=text, font=font, fill=color, anchor=NW)
    (textWidth, textHeight) = textSize(canvas, text, font)
    canvas.create_rectangle(left, 20, left+textWidth, 20+textHeight)

stepAnimation.run(textSizeDemoAnimation, width=400, height=90, timerDelay=10,
                  text="Fantastic!", color="brown")
###############################
 
That's it for now.  We'll post a couple smaller string questions tomorrow, along with the bonus.  But this is certainly plenty enough for folks to get started.
 
Good luck and have fun!
 
David

Optional/Advanced lecture tonight, 6pm, WEH 7500
Hi all.  Tonight's topics are:
 
Optional/Advanced: Countability and the Halting Problem
Optional/Advanced: Complexity and NP-Completeness
 
These are truly amazing theoretical results on the limits of computation.  Head-spinning stuff!
 
And no promises that we'll have pizza (like we did last week)...
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Required reading (on reading)
Hi all.  As with all our posts here (except explicitly indicated otherwise, as sometimes happens), this is required reading.  All of it.  Carefully.
 
To encourage you to read it all, carefully:  there is 100% chance that something in this post will be covered on tomorrow's quiz.  I am loathe to attach that requirement just to get you to read, but alas, there it is.
 
This post is not about policing, or punishing, or judging.  It is a heartfelt attempt to help you, written out of genuine and deep concern for you.  It is about informing you.  It is about trying to convince you that you have to read, not because we say so, but because it is the only way for you to succeed.  That you have to change your attitude about reading.  That you have to read slowly, carefully, meticulously.  If you don't, you cannot be a successful engineer.  Or software developer.  Or anything technical.  Really.
 
We continue to see disturbing signs that many of you are not reading the course content (course notes, piazza posts, hw writeups, even quiz questions), at least not carefully, though often hardly at all.  This has been a steady trend over the past 5-10 years, but now we are approaching a tipping point.  Something must be done.
 
Many of you substitute a 5-second keyword search for actual reading.  I highlighted that in bold for humorous effect.  It's not funny.
 
Many of you think TL;DR is a good thing.  It is not.  Not in any technical writing, at least.
 
And it is hurting many of you for real, right now, in serious ways.
 
Yesterday, for example, numerous students tried to submit hw3 after the 8pm last-submission deadline, which they were unaware of, despite the fact that it was posted here numerous times, along with other posts imploring you to read those posts.  Sigh.  We'll deal with those submission separately.  Naturally, if accepted at all (which is not assured), it would be with a major deduction.  But we may not accept them at all (still discussing).  In any case, this is a clear example of failing to read leading directly to lost points and gratuitously wasted effort.  Serious bummer.
 
It is certainly the case that your generation basically does not read.  You do read, only 140 characters at a time.  Or searching for bold-font keywords.  Or in pithy texts and FB wall updates (or whatever is currently replacing those dinosaurs).
 
This is not a rant against that.  Really.  It does sadden me that most of you don't read books, thereby closing your minds to thousands of years of great human artistic, scientific, and literary creations, that you are purposely depriving yourselves of the joy of investing many hours into slowly sipping a tantalizingly well-written book, and the insights and inspirations that come from that experience.  But that is a choice you have every right to make, and I have no grounds to judge you for it, which I do not.
 
But technical material is very different, and your inability or unwillingness to read it appropriately is indeed a serious problem.
 
The "long" posts and hw writeups you see in 112 are really nothing compared to what lies ahead for most of you.  Real technical specs can be hundreds of pages long, sometimes longer still.  They are extremely detailed, and use extremely technical jargon.  And you simply must carefully read every single word, and thoroughly understand it.  Failure to do so leads to failure to deliver.  It leads to planes crashing, rockets crashing, financial markets crashing, websites crashing, apps crashing...  It leads to careers crashing, too.  Angry consumers, failed products, injured companies, expensive lawsuits, tarnished careers.
 
This is real.  You have to learn how to read technical material and really understand it.
 
And since your generation collectively doesn't read anything carefully, you need to swim upstream.  You need to show some of that CMU exceptionalism (I'm entirely serious), and you have to go against your generational tide.  Not with everything.  Skim your tweets, glance at your FB posts, peek at reddit (does anyone still use reddit?).  But when it comes to technical material, you need a whole new way.  Sip it.  Slowly.  Carefully.  Word by word.   Understand it.  Thoroughly.
 
To fail to read like an engineer is to fail to be an engineer.  Period.
 
Here are what some real specs look like:
Google Maps API Web Services
Websockets
OpenGL
SciPy
 
Think about each of these (be sure you know what they are, at least!), and click through a couple of them.  Peek at what they look like.  These are the kind of products and services you are likely to use, so these are exactly the kinds of specs you need to understand.  Thoroughly.
 
There are two alternatives:  learn to master these imposing specs, or relegate yourself to being a second-class technical citizen, to having a lower career arc, to forever be working for your technically superior colleagues who understand these kinds of specs and can therefore use these powerful tools far more effectively than you can.

That's no choice at all.  So you simply have to learn to read, to become technically literate.
 
And so you now have to start forming the right habits of mind.  This is about a new attitude, a new way of thinking about what reading is and why it matters to you.  Why there have to be so many words:  Because sometimes things cannot be said so precisely and completely in fewer words.  Why there has to be such meticulous detail: Because sometimes things must be specified utterly precisely, so that they work predictably and reliably and so that they can interact predictably and reliably with other things built by other people.
 
If you believe this, if you believe that lots of detailed words are required, and you believe that you also truly need to read and thoroughly understand those words -- if you really believe this -- only then will you do something about it.
 
I hope you believe it.  We see it right here in 112.  We see question after question answered by us literally quoting previously-posted, clearly-unread material. We see points lost, effort lost, and learning lost.
 
The fact that it lowers your 112 grade saddens me a bit.  But the fact that it lowers your prospects to be a successful professional is the serious issue here, the reason for this post, the reason we must try to remedy this problem, to swim against this generational tide.
 
Be CMU students.  Be exceptional.  Rise above the tide, and read, and read carefully, and read well, so that you can shine brightly here at CMU and beyond.
 
Shine, shine, shine!!!  Literately.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
 
Some strings practice problems
Hi all.  For those looking for some strings practice problems, you can try some of these:
 
http://www.kosbie.net/cmu/fall-12/15-112/handouts/notes-practice-thru-week4.html
 
Enjoy!

David

Mortar Board event tonight
Hi all.  This is optional and not a 112 thing, but I was one of the speakers in this event last year, and I have been asked to spread the word about this year's event.  The info is below.  I highly recommend attending!

Carpe diem.
 
David
 
Hint for "infinite loop" in nearestKaprekar: don't skip Polya Step 2!
Hi all.  Many of you are experiencing timeouts (possible "infinite loops") in nearestKaprekar.  I put "infinite loop" in quotes because in most cases it's not an infinite loop, just taking way too long.
 
The issue really comes down to this:  you are not doing Polya Step 2, carefully reasoning out how you'd solve the problem without Python.  So your solutions are doing something you personally would never, ever do.  And that thing is taking way, way too long in some cases.
 
To find the problem, do what we talked about:  imagine some very large N and how you would find the nearest Kaprekar to it.  Carefully think about each step you would personally take, without a computer (but with an old-fashioned calculator, if you must).  Then: very, very carefully think about when you would stop, when is the earliest that you would know that you for sure have the answer.
 
Then translate that into Python (Polya step 3).
 
Skipping, or at least not completely finishing, Polya Step 2 has cost lots of you lots of time and also some points this week.  But it's a great lesson for us all to collectively learn.  Polya sounds pedantic, and maybe even is pedantic, but it works.  So stick to it.
 
Good luck wrapping up hw3.  And good night (says the morning bird).
 
And...  Carpe diem.
 
David

Hint: read our posts!
Hi all.  A whole bunch of submissions were wasted because people simply did not read our posts.  So, for example, people continued all day *today* to keep submitting code with their animations above the #ignore_rest line.  Bummer.
 
The answer:  read our posts, all of them, completely, and carefully.  We make a lot of them, yes, but they have a suitably high signal-to-noise ratio to not waste your time, and they contain lots of really useful and important information.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

How to gracefully deal with being out of submissions
Hi all.  If you are out of submissions, for whatever reason, you should plan on using a grace day.  That also comes with ceiling(n/2.0) submissions, or this week an extra 4 submissions.  So you have your submissions, at no penalty other than a lost grace day.
 
Use them wisely!
 
David

hw3 super extension
Hi all.  While some of you may not watch tonight's Super Bowl, many others will, or at least would if not for hw3.  And so...  There is a course-wide 1-day extension on hw3, so it is now due tomorrow (Monday) at 10pm.

As a consequence, we will reduce tonight's OH coverage a bit, and move some of those resources to tomorrow night.  Either way, you should expect both nights to be fairly intense, probably with long queues.  We'll do our best to manage that, but sometimes the queues get long no matter how many resources we devote to them...
 
A couple of additional notes:  first, and importantly, the last-time-to-submit remains Tuesday at 8pm.  Second, those who already received an extension do not get a double-extension, so your extensions will be reduced by one day in autolab, which is to say your due date remains unchanged by this.
 
And: if you are planning to watch the game tonight, you really, really should try super hard to make super progress on hw3 before the super bowl.  It'd be just super if you did that!
 
Also: regardless of your interest in American football (which, I should add, is really fascinating, if you take the time to appreciate that it's way more sophisticated than just a bunch of brutes smashing each other!), I recommend that you do watch at least part of the Super Bowl, perhaps a bit of football and a bit of halftime, maybe nearby someone who can explain what's going on if you don't already know.  This is not a plug for the sport.  It's just that it's the single most popular American event, and a way to get a real taste of modern Americana, for better and indeed perhaps for worse.  After all, over 167,000,000 people watched last year.  That's more than the number of people who voted in our last presidential election (sad, but true).  It's more than the population of Argentina, of England, of Thailand.  Combined.  It's just a lot of people.
 
Also, the commercials rock.  Well, some of them, at least. 
 
In any case, whether you watch or not, you get the extension.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Using parentheses to help manage 80-char/line issues
Hi all.   There is no one-size-fits-all solution to avoiding 80-char/line issues, but here is a nice fairly general technique that can help:
 
You can always place newlines inside parenthesized expressions.  So you can do this:
 
canvas.create_oval(cx-r*math.cos(theta),
                   cy-r*math.sin(theta),
                   cx+r*math.cos(theta),
                   cy+r*math.sin(theta)
                  )
 
One downside is that this now counts as 5 lines of code against the 25 lines max per animation function, but least it helped with the 80 chars/line issue.
 
If you must, you could strike a balance between clarity and line counts by tightening up the lines a bit as such:
 
canvas.create_oval(cx-r*math.cos(theta), cy-r*math.sin(theta),
                   cx+r*math.cos(theta), cy+r*math.sin(theta))
 
Note that your newlines inside parentheses must be indented to match the indentation level of the previous line, so in particular this is NOT ok:
 
# NOT OK: bad indenting
canvas.create_oval(cx-r*math.cos(theta), cy-r*math.sin(theta),
cx+r*math.cos(theta), cy+r*math.sin(theta))
 
Anyhow, hope this helps!
 
David

Fixed link to stepAnimation.py download
Hi again.  Sorry, I linked to the file on my local drive.  Sigh...
 
Here is the real link you want:
  http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112/notes/stepAnimation.py
 
Enjoy!
 
David

stepAnimation notes updates (with optional new download of version 1.02)
Hi all.  Here are a couple changes in the stepAnimation notes that you might be interested in:
 
First, I just updated stepAnimation.py to version 1.02.  You can download the new one from the course notes or here.  The old version works mostly just fine, and you do not have to download the new version.  But the new version has these helpful fixes and new features:
step label is now visible on multiple runs
animation window can still close now after your code crashes
no long wait when going faster after going very slow
prints version number when you run
The first two in particular may be the most helpful.
 
Second, I added a couple of interesting alternative ways to do the horizontal bouncing square computation without the piecewise-function approach we covered in class.  One is based on using absolute values, the other is on a clever idea Sunny G suggested using acos(cos(x)).  You may use either of these approaches if you wish, but you still should at least understand the piecewise-function approach.
 
Enjoy, and...  Carpe diem.
 
David

Key hw3 hint: use good style, all along!!!!
Hi all.  We have very few hw3 submissions at this point, but nearly all of them would lose all the style points.  Historically speaking, this will remain true for nearly everyone this week, and nearly everyone will lose most to all of the 5 style points available this week.

Don't be a style point loser!!!  Be a style point winner!!!!  :-)
 
Use good style all along.  It's not something you add at the end.   You have to learn to write code with good style, and not patch it afterwards with style band-aids.  Start learning this today!

And before you submit, read and re-read the style rules, and then check and re-check that your code adheres to all of them.
 
Otherwise, you'll invest tons of effort only to have your 100/100 reduced to 95/100 due to "silly" style errors (and then on future hw's, reduced all the way to 90/100)!!!  I put silly in quotes because, as we discussed at length in class this past week, style matters.  A LOT.  But still, it's a shame to lose points due to some comment extending beyond 80 characters on a line, or due to one variable being named poorly.  But that's exactly what will happen, unless you don't let it happen!!!
 
Good luck with it.
 
And...  Carpe diem.
 
David

Hw2 grades are posted
Median was 98/100.  Nice work!
 
David

hw3 important hint: place animations and all non-autograded stuff below #ignore_rest line!
Hi all.  You need to place your animations, including your imports for stepAnimation and Tkinter, below the #ignore_rest line.  Otherwise, the autograder will crash while looking for the imports that aren't there, and you'll get 0/30 and needlessly lose a submission.
 
The #ignore_rest line specifically is for the autograder, and tells it to, well, ignore the rest of the file.
 
So also place your non-autograded functions below there, as well as all your test functions, and your main function.  Anything that's not autograded goes below that line.
 
Hope this helps.
 
David

Carpe diem
Hi all.  This is the 14,070th and final piazza contribution for 15-112-f14.  Whew!  :-)

I completely agree with everything Prof Ada said.  Thanks to all of you, students and CA's, for making this course such a great joy to teach and to be part of.  Also, thanks again to Prof Ada, who was truly a pleasure to co-teach with, and who added tremendously to all aspects of the course this semester (I wish my first semester at CMU went even half as well as his)!  I look forward to co-teaching again hopefully very soon.
 
It has been such a joy working with all of you and watching you grow so much in such a short time. And your term projects are a strong testament to your hard-won programming prowess. Kudos!!!!
 
I hope you all enjoy a happy and restorative winter break, and that next semester goes swimmingly for all of you!
 
And please do keep in touch.  While I truly enjoyed teaching you how to program, I get perhaps even more joy hearing what you do with this after 112 (even long after)!  So go do it!  And then let us know!
 
Which brings us to the the end.  I sign nearly all my posts with "Carpe Diem".  Literally, "seize the day".  But what does it *mean*?  It means to live your life actively, not passively.  To decide who you want to be, and to take at least one step every single day to be closer to that person, to your own ideal self, whatever that means to you.  It means finding what you care about, and then doing something about it.  It means trying to make the world a better place, or at least trying every day to take one step in that direction, again according to whatever you think that means.  It does not mean being perfect, it does not mean never having bad days.  Be imperfect.  Have some bad days.  Just try, every day, as best you can, to be your best you.  And then accept what comes of it.  :-)
 
The world has so many problems, humanity has so many needs.  I am heartened by the firm knowledge that so many of you will be part of so many solutions to these problems, that you will satisfy so many needs, that the world will be such a better place thanks to you.  And in some cases, perhaps, you may even use some programming to make that happen.  :-)
 
May you all shine very brightly, and may you have lots of fun along the way.

Carpe diem.
 
David
 
Getting started
Hi all.  It's 9am, we're getting started.  We have donuts, coffee, bananas, danishes.  We have everything except you!  Well, some of you are here!
 
For those who signed up, and are not here, now's the time to show up!

See you soon!  Well, hopefully...  :-)

David

Optional lecture/event Monday 1-4pm, "pre-prise" Sunday (tomorrow) 9am-noon
Hi all.  So there was plenty enough interest to forge ahead!  I will give one last optional lecture this semester, though who knows, maybe there will be a tiny mini-puzzle-hunt, too.  Or instead.  Or not.  We'll see.  And the lecture topic will probably be "how to write a (very, very simple) programming language".
 
For those who are interested, we'll meet Monday, 1-4pm.  Please check my office for the location, which will probably be somewhere nearby (maybe GHC 4215, but maybe not).
 
Also, for those who cannot make it Monday, we'll have a "pre-prise" tomorrow (Sunday) starting at 9am.
 
Either way, given how the talk builds on itself, please try hard to be on time (thanks).
 
For those who can make it both days, please attend Monday if you can, when we'll have a room reserved.  Tomorrow, we do not have a room, so we'll meet at my office and hopefully all fit, but if not, then hopefully we can find something unlocked nearby.
 
Finally, unfortunately, neither of these times worked for just a few of you, and I apologize for that.  There was no pair of times that worked for everyone (sigh).
 
See some of you tomorrow, and some more on Monday!
 
Carpe diem.

David
 
Microsoft Kinect Project Feedback (optional)
Hi again.  For those of you who used a Kinect for your term project (or really for any sort of project):  Microsoft has asked for more info about your project.  This is entirely optional, but if you are so inclined, please send an email to Anthony Rotoli (Anthony.Rotoli@microsoft.com) and Brian Sherwin (Brian.Sherwin@microsoft.com), cc'ed to myself and Prof Ada.  Please state your project title, brief project description, a link to a project video if any, and perhaps some thoughts on how it went (specifically, how easy/hard it was for you to use the Kinect API, how much of it you were able to take advantage of in your project, etc).  Also, please include any ideas you might have on how Microsoft can perhaps improve this experience for future 112 students.  Again, 100% optional.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Microsoft 112-invitational interviews sign-up (due Fri Dec 19th)
[ Note: I would have sent this to the soon-to-exist 112++ mailing list, except we discussed this with all of you this semester, and the Microsoft folks talked about something like this at the Kinect Workshop, so I think this should get general distribution.  Hence this piazza post...   Also, fwiw, some opportunities are open to everyone, others are open chiefly to students with higher or highest grades -- in general, we'll share everything that comes along and leave it to you to figure out which ones are most appropriate for you to consider. ]
 
Hi all. Did you receive a high-A on your term project, your final exam, and your semester grade? If so, are you interested in talking to (that is, interviewing with) Microsoft in early January (the first week of spring classes) about summer internship possibilities? If you said yes to both these questions, then fill out this optional form, including giving us permission to share your contact information with Microsoft.  Note that they have limited interview spaces available, so perhaps only some of those who register interest may be invited to participate.
 
Also note that we have no special relationship with Microsoft, although we do thank them for their kindness in supporting 15-112. We happily welcome any companies who would provide compelling opportunities specifically tailored for 15-112 students in this or any future semester.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

The entirely-optional "112++" mailing list
Hi all. As we we wrap up the semester, the near-constant stream of 112 posts shall soon cease to spam your inboxes! But if you really want that spam to continue, you can have it! :-) Ok, that's not quite what this is about. More to the point, this form is for those of you who wish to stay on a mailing list to which I might send 112-related or sort-of-112-related posts from time to time. For example, we talked about The Bridge opportunities. We also discussed perhaps being involved in placing 112 online, or producing K-12 CS materials. And I do receive occasional internship inquiries from companies that are well-suited for 112 alums. That sort of thing.
 
Anyhow, if you wish to be on the list, please fill out this form, and then you'll probably receive an email every now and then from me, perhaps. :-)
 
This is, of course, entirely optional.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

One Last Optional Lecture or Puzzle Hunt (or something else) (maybe)
Hi all. Several of you have asked if we'll have one last optional lecture. Perhaps! Let's see who is interested and would attend... Please fill out this form by 5pm today (Saturday) if you are interested.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

One more thing...
For a host of good reasons, if lots of people arrive simultaneously, we'll cap the number of people in each of our offices viewing their final exams to some reasonable limit.  This may result in a wait outside the office (not inside, of course).  If the line is long (which may or may not happen, who knows?), you might do well to simply leave and return say half an hour or an hour later.  Anyhow, if you do stay outside the office, please be orderly and understanding!  :-)
 
Thanks.
 
David

Final exam viewing protocol (bring your andrew id card!)
Hi all.  For those interested in viewing their graded final exams today (1-3pm or again from 5-6pm), here is the protocol:
 
* You give your physical andrew id card to a helpful CA in exchange for your graded final exam
* The exam, and you, must stay in the room the whole time
* You may not take notes or pictures, and you may not discuss the exam with others in the room
* You may ask the professor or a CA for clarifications.
* As for grade changes, we will not add a half-point here and there for subjective grading (that is, where the answer is incorrect, but you disagree with the points deducted for the error).  We worked very hard to make a very fair rubric and to ensure it was applied very fairly, and it would be unfair to everyone else to change the rubric at this point just because someone voiced concerns.  That said, we will of course change any obvious grading errors.  These are very rare, you should know.
* With this in mind, the point of looking at your final exam should be to further edify you, perhaps to learn a last little bit or to figure out which material you might want to continue to review and further master, perhaps over break.  The point is not to hope to secure a higher grade.
* Anyhow, once you are done reviewing your final exam, you submit it back to the CA and then receive your physical andrew id card back.
 
Easy peasy!  Enjoy!  And congrats again on a great job on this final!  :-)
 
David

Hardware returns
Hi all.  If you have a Kinect or other hardware on loan for your term project, please return it at OH today or tomorrow (unless you have arranged to borrow it over break).
 
Thanks!

David

Final exam reviewing (Fri, 1-3pm and 5-6pm)
Hi all.  A number of you have mentioned that you will be taking finals on Friday from 1-3pm.  For that reason, Prof Ada and I will also have OH on Friday from 5-6pm.  These are open OH, for anything, including reviewing graded finals.  The same rules of course apply (you may not remove your final exam from our office, etc).
 
Again, sections A-I should view their exams in my office, and sections J-R should view their exams in Prof Ada's office.
 
For those who cannot make these times, you may view your exams in January.  No worries:  in the extraordinarily (and unprecedented) event that a final exam grading error would result in a semester grade change, we could just change it then, no problem.  Again, though, this has never happened, so we don't expect it this time, either.  But you are definitely welcome in January, or any time, to review your graded final exam.
 
Carpe diem.

David

My OH Thursday and Friday
Hi again.  I'll have OH Thursday (well, today now) from noon to 2pm.  Graded finals will not be available for review then, as some students are yet to take the final.
 
I will also have OH on Friday from 1-3pm.  Graded finals will be available then for review (Sections A-I in my office, and Sections J-R in Prof Ada's office).
 
See some of you there!

Carpe diem.

David

AMG grades
Hi again.  The AMG grades are also now computed and entered into Autolab (except for the few of you taking the alternate final exam on Friday).  For those of you with semester grades over 70, your AMG grade is 0, because AMG only applies for students with grades below 69 (because the highest grade AMG can obtain is a C).
 
For the rest of you:  AMG follows the formula in the syllabus.  If your AMG score is 69.5 or higher, you will receive a C at the semester.  Note that your semester grade in Autolab currently ignores your AMG, but don't worry, if your AMG is 69.5 or higher, you WILL receive a C at the semester!
 
If your AMG is on the bubble -- below 69.5 but not too far below -- then Prof Ada and I will give your case careful consideration before assigning a semester grade.  As with other bubble cases, this process takes a few days, so please do not send us email asking us to do this, because we WILL do it, and instead please wait and let us do this review.  We will do it, and we will be sure to give your case careful and full consideration.
 
Carpe diem.

David
 
Final exam grades (and viewing graded finals)
Hi all.  We just wrapped up a marathon 10-hour final exam grading extravaganza (thanks, CA's!!!!!), and...  The results are magnificent!
 
The median (with the two half-weighted problems) is an unprecentedly high 86.9.  Wow!!!  This is the best-ever final exam median for 15-112.  Awesome job, folks!!!!  :-)
 
Top score is 101.9, with 4 scores over 100 and 14 scores over 99.  Excellent!!!
 
These scores are entered in autolab, and also are reflected in your current semester average in autolab.
 
For those taking the alternate final, your final grade is entered as a 0 for now.  Of course, we'll update that on Friday.
 
Also: Note that we still have some work to do in computing semester grades, particularly for those on the bubble (just below the next-higher grade).  More on that soon.  For now, please do not send us email asking us to reconsider your case.  For those on the bubble, we automatically do so, and we have yet to give it a careful review, which we will do, but it takes a few days.  So please wait for us to do that.  (Thanks.)
 
Also, you may want to inspect your graded final exam.  We first have to wait for everyone to actually take the final, including those who are sitting for the alternate final exam on Friday.  And so:  Prof Ada and I will hold special OH on Friday from 1pm to 3pm specifically so you can view your graded final if you wish.  To do so, go to the professor's office whose lecture you are assigned (so Sections A-I can get their exams from me, and Sections J-R can get your exams from Prof Ada).  Again, this is Friday, 1-3pm.  Note that you may not take your final exam from our offices, nor may you take notes or photocopy your exam while reviewing it.  Also note that we will keep your exam physically stored for a few years, so you have plenty of time in the spring or even later to check your final if you wish.
 
Finally:  while most of you did extremely well on the final, some of you did not get the grade you hoped for.  We understand this can be quite dispiriting.  And while we can't really change the grade (it is what it is), we certainly understand your concerns, and are happy to discuss your grade, what it may mean to your academic planning, and ways you might be more effective in the future.  Please do stop by either of our office hours to chat.
 
Once again: great job, everyone.  And thanks again, CA's!!!

Carpe diem.

David

Final exam: do all 10 parts (don't skip #9!)
Hi all.  I am reviewing the printed final exams now, and everything is good to go.  But here is an important safety hint:  #9 is on a page by itself, and due to the indenting and the stapling, the start of the problem while readable is a bit obscured.  Not a problem, just be sure not to miss it!!!
 
Bottom line:  there are 10 problems, and please be sure to attempt all 10 of them!!!!
 
Good luck!!!!
 
David

Our TP Gallery is now available!
Hi all.  As the subject says, the TP Gallery is now live on our course website.  It contains a whole bunch of really compelling projects!  I hope and trust that this will be of benefit to you, but I assure you it will be of great benefit to future 112 students.  So for those who are in the TP Gallery, many thanks!!!  And for everyone, kudos again on your splendid term projects!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Term Project grades
Hi all.  Thanks to the enormous efforts of our CA's, the term projects are now graded.  The grades are in autolab in two ways.  First, tp3 includes grades out of 80 points, along with the tp3 comments, which hopefully you will all read.  Second, there is now a "tp" category, which is the sum of tp1+tp2+tp3, and is out of 100 points, and is now factored into your current course average computation.
 
The results were tremendous.  The median on tp3 was a super-high 90% (72/80).  That means fully HALF of you scored an A on the term project.  Absolutely fabulous!!!
 
Now, some of you put in a lot of effort and then did not receive the grade you had hoped for.  We understand that this can be discouraging, but at least you should know that we took great strides to make the grading as fair and consistent as possible.  Beyond the two graders who carefully reviewed your case, we also had the entire staff meet for basically all of Sunday morning, carefully reviewing and discussing case after case, so that we built significant consensus on how to assign grades with consistency and fairness, despite the wide range of disparate projects.
 
With all this in mind, it is extremely unlikely that we would be inclined to change any grades at this point.  Really, the only basis for that would be an outright grading error, such as if a major portion of your work somehow went unnoticed.  Beyond something as stark as that, realistically the grades will stand as they are.
 
Well, mostly...  There is one more step:  at the very end of the semester (which is quite close now), Prof Ada and I will review each case individually for those students who are just below the next-higher grade level.  As part of that process, we typically take one more look at their term projects.  That rarely leads to any grade changes, but that process is there and we will do our careful due diligence for anyone just below a grade boundary at the semester.
 
Meanwhile, if you have grading concerns, or in general would like to discuss your term project grading, or anything else about your term project, your first stop is your mentor.  In this case, Jordan is actually your second stop.  Of course, any issue can ultimately land on my desk or Prof Ada's desk, but please follow this protocol, and please bear in mind everything I just said above.
 
Ok, enough about grades.  Let's talk results.  Because -- my goodness -- you collectively hit the jackpot with some absolutely fabulous projects.  Kudos!!!  Really.  You all should be very proud of yourselves for a job very well done.
 
And now back to the last item at hand....  Best of luck on the final!

Carpe diem.
 
David

Final exam logistics, policies, and suggestions (required reading)
Hi all. Here is important info for the final exam tomorrow.  Please read all of this carefully today:
 
* Bring your physical photo andrew id card to the final!
Everyone must show a photo andrew id card to get into the room, and then again to submit your completed exam and leave the room.  With a class of so many students, not every proctor will know every student, and so we will visually verify every student's id.  No id, no final, no exceptions!

* Attend your assigned room!
Rooms are assigned according to andrew id's as such (this is also on the course website):
   DH 2210: Andrew Id's from AA*** to HY***
   DH 2315: Andrew Id's from IC*** to RN***
   DH 2302: Andrew Id's from RO*** to VR***
   DH 1212: Andrew Id's from VS*** to ZZ***
Be sure to attend the correct room!  Of course, those of you who have pre-approved and pre-scheduled times with Larry Powell's office will also work directly with them on when and where to sit for your exam.

* Sit every other seat, in columns
When viewed from the front, there should be straight columns heading back.  So you would sit directly behind the person in front of you, with nobody within one seat on either side of you.

* Do not discuss the final with those who are yet to take it (of course)
A small group of students have university-approved conflicts and so will not take the exam until Friday.  Please be sure to not talk to them about any aspect of the final exam until after they take the exam, too.
 
* No questions, except language clarifications and possible exam errors
This is the usual policy.  We are happy to explain any English terms if you do not understand them.  And you may bring actual errors in the exam to our attention (though these are quite rare, though again they do sometimes happen).  Otherwise, no questions.

* Scratch paper policy
Unlike on our quizzes or midterms, you may not use your own scratch paper on the final exam.   Aside from your own pen or pencil (that is not red!), you may only use materials that we provide to you.  Blank sheets of scratch paper will be available as you enter the exam room.  You may take one sheet if you wish.  If you do take a sheet of scratch paper that we provide, then you must place your name and andrew id clearly at the top, and submit it along with your final exam.  We will not look at it nor use it in any way when grading.  Even so, you must submit any scratch paper, even if it is blank.

* Bathroom policy
If you need to do so, raise your hand and stay seated until a proctor can escort you.  We have limited proctors, and so we can only escort one or two people at a time, so this may take a few minutes in some cases.
 
* Midway break
About halfway through the exam, we will stop the clock for one minute, when everyone is free to stand up and stretch in place.  No talking or otherwise communicating with neighbors, though.  This minute will not count towards the 180 minutes.

* Candy and such
The CS Department kindly provides candy to students taking CS finals.  You may augment this with your own snacks and drinks (in closed containers) if you wish.  Please be respectful of those around you and eat quietly, and please leave the room as you found it (without crumbs and wrappers).
 
* Arrive early!
We will start at 5:30pm sharp.  So please arrive a bit early.
 
And now a few things that are more suggestions than requirements...

* Keep comfortable
Studies confirm that if you are too cold or too hot your grade may suffer.  So wear light layers, and add or remove them as needed during the exam to stay just right!  And wear comfortable shoes.  It helps!  :-)

* Don't stress too much!
A little stress is usually a good thing, keeping you energized and focused.  Too much stress is definitely a bad thing, for obvious reasons.  So do the things you need to do, use the tricks you've learned that work for you, to keep your stress levels down.  You are fine.  You'll do fine.  Just stay focused and do your best.

* Remember the weighting scheme
Continuing on the "don't stress" mantra:  Remember that the two lowest problems are automatically half-weighted.  So even if you completely skip a free response, for example, you'd only lose at most 5 points for that, which is not ideal, but really is not a big deal.  And remember that we are fairly liberal in awarding partial credit, especially for free response questions.  So don't stress, and just do what you can, and move on.

* Keep moving!
The exam is not a race -- with 180 minutes to cover 10 sections, that's 18 minutes per section, which is plenty of time.  Even so, you should pace yourself.  Don't recklessly race forward, but do keep moving ahead, and not getting stuck for too long on one problem.  Do what you can first, then double back to the problems that you need more time for.
 
* Check your work!
If you are done early, maybe take a short break for a minute or two to clear your head, but then... Check and re-check all your answers.  In particular, be sure that you actually answered every question on the exam!  And check that you satisfied all the conditions in the free response problems.

* Do the bonus (if you are done early)
Bonus problems are hard by design, but they are also at least somewhat doable.  Do not even think about bonus until you are done, and have checked and re-checked your answers.  But if you still have time, take a gander at the bonus.  It's just free points, after all!
 
* Get plenty of sleep tonight!
Tonight is the night to get your 8+ hours of sound sleep!  Do not short your sleep tonight!  We have an evening exam, so you are more likely to be tired than in an afternoon exam.  So be sure to get your sleep!!!
 
* Keep a positive attitude
Studies confirm the obvious: you will do better if you are in a better frame of mind.  So smile, relax, keep your chin up, and just do your best, and you'll be fine!
 
Carpe diem!  And good luck!

David


Two more final exam notes/hints
1) You do not need to know bitwise operators.  They are not on the exam (except maybe very briefly in a bonus question).
 
2) You should know the difference between s.find() and s.index() for strings.
 
David

David's Office Hours This Week
Hi all.  Following on Anil's post, I'll take the second leg and cover 1-3pm on Monday and Tuesday.
 
We'll all take Wednesday off to grade the finals.  Depending on how that goes, we may need time on Thursday, too.
 
Once we know how that is going, I'll post back here about some OH later this week.
 
Good luck with your studies, and be sure to keep getting enough sleep!

David

Final Exam: Pre-Published Notes and Hints
Hi all.  I hope you enjoyed some post-tp euphoria!  And I further hope your final exam studies are going well so far.  To that end, here are some "pre-published notes and hints" for the final exam:
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pre-Published Notes and Hints
* There are 10 sections, each worth 10 points.  These include Short Answer, Code Tracing, Reasoning over Code, and then 7 Free Response sections.  So the exam is fairly traditional, but with a slightly heavier weighting on Free Response.
* The two sections on which you score the lowest will be half-weighted.
* You should know how to use s.split() and s.splitlines() for strings.
* You should know how to use getRGB and setRGB from the Steganography notes.
* Monte Carlo will be on the final.
* Steganography will be on the final.
* Backtracking will be on the final.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
That's it!
 
Of course, anything we have covered all semester long may appear on the final, but the topics explicitly mentioned above are guaranteed to be on it.  Also, given that you did a homework assignment on backtracking (solveABC), we would expect you to have a firm understanding of that technique...
 
Again, good luck with your studies.
 
And don't get too stressed, nor study too hard.  Really.  As noted numerous times here, you have worked so hard for 4 months now, and you are ready for this!  And while some study is probably a good idea, too much studying is definitely a bad idea!
 
The best way for you to give yourself your best chance on the final is to get plenty of rest.  Sleep is gold.  And exercise regularly.  And relax, and have fun with friends, and yeah, ok, study a bit.  And sleep a lot!  Every night!
 
Best of luck!!!  Though, remember:  luck favors a prepared mind.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

FCE's and additional optional feedback form
Hi all.  First, congratulations again on such a wonderful job last night, and to everyone on your great term projects!!!  And now, though, we have to get back to business, as a few things remain for us in the few days ahead.
 
While we grade term projects, and prepare the final exam, there is another matter we hope you can attend to:  now is the time for FCE's.  These are really important.  They let you voice your opinion, and they very much help us improve the course for future 112 students (and thanks for that!).  Your voice is important and really does matter.   Many of the key 112 policies were started based on student suggestions.   So please make them!

Also, while the FCE form is very important, it is also very short.  So we provide an additional optional form for longer feedback.  Please fill out the course FCE's, but then, if you have additional comments about any part of the course, or any clever new ideas that we might include in the future, please let us know with this optional and anonymous feedback form.
 
Thank you again!!!  And...  Carpe diem!
 
David

Presenters have been notified
Hi all.  Anil, Jordan, and I, along with all the CA's, have had a near-impossible time trying to winnow this awesome group of projects down to just 15.  Really.
 
But we did our best, and those 15 super awesome project authors have been notified.
 
You should know that we easily could have selected dozens more to include tonight.  Maybe next semester we should book the room until midnight.  :-)
 
But we are now good to go for this year.  We'll see you 52 minutes.  It'll be great!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

It's time to submit! Really..
Hi all.  It's 4pm, the deadline is 30 minutes from now, and we have 260 submissions so far (and I am *really* enjoying looking through the videos!).  Woohoo!
 
But that leaves over 100 more to go.  And now we are getting close....
 
Don't cut it any closer!  Please submit now.
 
The time to polish things up has passed.  Now you just need to submit.  Now.
 
If you don't have a video yet, then please submit without one now, then make your video, and try to resubmit by 4:30pm.
 
But get *something* submitted now!
 
Good luck wrapping it up.
 
David

TP Gallery Signup Form
 
Hi all.  Did you find the TP Gallery useful?  Would you be interested in being part of this semester's TP Gallery?  I hope so!  :-)
Once you have published your TP video, then please fill out this optional form if you want your project included in the online TP Gallery for this semester.  We encourage a rich variety of projects, with no restrictions based on grades or anything else.  If you want it included in the gallery, it's in!  The more the merrier!
You worked long and hard on your projects.  Now you can share your successes with the world!
Kudos, and Carpe diem.
David


Go Time!
Hi all.  Time has officially flown, and the TP deadline has arrived (well, in 8.5 hours).  Some reminders for today:
 
* Lecture is really optional OH.  CA's will be there to help with last-minute OH issues.
 
* I will have my usual OH.
 
* The tp deadline is 4:30pm sharp, with no extensions.  Please be certain to submit before then.  Even if you have technical difficulties, or any other kind of difficulties, submit something in autolab by 4:30pm.
 
* All submissions go to autolab, not email.
 
* The TP Showcase is tonight at 8pm in McConomy.  It is a required event, though we understand some of you have conflicts.  Just please try to attend as much as you can.
 
* Please sit nearer the front of the (large) auditorium.  It's more fun that way.  Also, in case there are t-shirts flying through the air (no promises, but this may have occurred in the past), you have a better chance of catching one!  :-)
 
* You may bring a friend.
 
* Presenters will be informed via email at 7pm sharp.  Please look to your email then.  We will also post to piazza once those emails are sent.
 
* Presenters meet at McConomy half an hour early (so, at 7:30pm).  Bring your laptop, ideally with an HDMI connection.  Also, set your screen resolution to be as low as you can while still getting your project to run.  More details later...
 
* And don't stress.  After all, this is all in good fun, to share in your collective accomplishments.
 
Meanwhile, with just 8.5 hours to go, it is time to wrap things up and submit your project.  Best of luck with it!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Departmental CA Feedback (optional, but very encouraged)
Hi again.  We thank you again for your very thoughtful and helpful CA feedback earlier in the semester.  That was our own in-course feedback process, to help us adjust and improve this course this semester.
 
Separately, the CS Department has its own end-of-semester CA Feedback process.  We very much welcome your feedback there, too.  It can be a great help for our CA's in their professional development.
 
Here is the optional form:
   https://www.ugrad.cs.cmu.edu/ta/F14/feedback
 
Please fill this out today with whatever constructive feedback you might have for whichever CA's you have most interacted with.
 
Thanks!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Use demo shortcuts ("cheats")
Hi again.  Here's some helpful advice:  add demo shortcuts (or "cheats") to your project.  You may want to demo some features that take a while to set up.  Rather than use precious time trying to create the conditions you need for that, instead just say press "1" to go to "cool demo scene 1", and "2" for "cool demo scene 2", and so on.  Then you hardcode all the conditions you need to demo that feature.  See?
 
Also, "cheats" can be helpful for demoing.  Say, adding immortality or moving through walls or being able to simply enter the current level, etc.
 
And pre-built examples also are very helpful.  If your program lets you draw pictures, instead of demoing some simple tiny picture, why not draw and save some fabulous picture, which you then can load right at the start of your demo?
 
Anyhow, the basic idea is that you own the code, so you can write that code specifically with an eye towards supporting your ability to demo the code well.
 
Carpe diem.

David

My OH today and tomorrow
Hi again.  I'll have extra OH today from 1-2:30pm, and I'll have my regular noon-to-2pm-or-later OH tomorrow, too.
 
Good luck wrapping up your projects.
 
David

Thursday plans (including TP Showcase)
Hi all.  We are a day away now.  Amazing how time flies at this part of the semester!  As you wrap up your projects, here are the plans for tomorrow.
 
The day has two parts:  finishing and submitting the projects, and then the TP Showcase.  The TP Showcase is in McConomy tomorrow (Thursday) night, starting at 8pm sharp (please show up early, we will start promptly at 8pm), and running for maybe a little over an hour (we'll be done by 9:30pm for sure, maybe earlier).
 
As for the showcase, it is not so much a competition as a chance for us all to share in some of the great projects that you have collectively produced.  There is an educational objective, to help you think about the rich variety of things you can now do with your hard-won programming prowess.  But it's also just about having some fun!  There is also a friendly competition, with prizes going to the winning projects.  And many thanks to our kind friends and supporters at APT (http://www.predictivetechnologies.com/) for sponsoring this event and for providing the prizes!
 
Now, we wish that all of you could present tomorrow night.  But time only permits that maybe 15 or so can present (out of 350+ projects).  So now we have the nearly impossible task of choosing those 15 projects.  What's more, we have very little time to do that (we start the process at 4:30pm sharp tomorrow!).  Given these constraints, we'll do our level best, but it is quite possible that one or two of the very best projects do not get included (sorry), and it is also simply guaranteed that dozens of superb projects simply cannot be included due to time constraints (ditto).  Even so, we'll do our best to pick a bunch of fun and compelling projects for the event.
 
Presenters will be notified via email by 7pm tomorrow (so please check your email promptly then!).  Presenters meet at McConomy at 7:30pm to make sure that AV works and to cover any other pre-event logistics.  Note that presenters may do a live demo of their project, or may elect to use portions of their video (which avoids demo gremlins, and also may simplify AV issues).  It's really your choice.  More details will be provided in the email tomorrow evening.
 
As for the main event, everyone should show up at McConomy a bit early, say starting at 7:50pm, so we can get the fun started at 8pm.  :-)
 
With that said, here is the schedule for tomorrow:
 
10:30am + 3pm:  Lecture (Optional last-minute OH)
We'll have some CA's on hand to help, not so much with debugging (you should not be writing any code tomorrow!), but more with video production, or uploading, or creating zip files, etc -- the final steps in packaging and submitting your project.  That said, of course we'll try to help as best we can with whatever issues you may have.
 
4:30pm:  tp deadline
Please be certain to submit by this deadline!  Again, all submissions must be via autolab (not email), and no late submissions will be accepted.
 
7:00pm: Presentation invitations will be emailed

7:30pm: Presenters meet at McConomy
 
8:00pm: TP Showcase in McConomy
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

Nokia phone left in lecture
Hi all.  As the subject line says, someone left a phone at the morning lecture.  I have it now at my office hours.
 
Cheers.
 
David

Awesome projects! (And time for more user studies if you want!)
Hi all.  I just want to commend you on the fabulous projects that were on display today in the morning lecture.  It's a joy to see you all being so creative, and productive, and accomplished!  Kudos!!!!
 
Aside: for those who want even more user study yummy goodness, you may certainly attend this afternoon's lecture, too.  The more the merrier!

In any case:  good luck, everyone, wrapping up your projects.  Focus on polishing and finishing.  Tie a bow on it.  Make a nice video.  And be proud of a job well done!  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David

tp2 grades + comments released (quiz9, too)
Hi all.  You should have already heard directly from your CA with your tp2 grades and comments, but these are also now in Autolab.  Please take the comments to heart, and make good decisions to converge to a solid working project over the next few days.
 
Also, quiz9 grades are posted.  The median was 105, as planned.  Good job.  :-)
 
As usual, grading concerns go to Jordan (thanks, Jordan!!!).
 
David

The homestretch (please read)
Hi all.  I hope you enjoyed a lovely Thanksgiving holiday!
 
And now we have to return to matters at hand:  this is the homestretch, folks.  The term project is due in 6 days.  This is not a time to panic, nor a time to work heroically for 144 straight hours.  No!  But it definitely is a time to be very smart about where you put your time and energy from here on out.
 
Some things to bear in mind (and I hope you do read all of this...):
 
* Converge
It is much better to have a small, solid, working project than a large, ambitious, but non-working project.  So do what you have to do now to get to that small working kernel.  This may involve changing your designs a bit to take advantage of what you do have working, even perhaps outright dropping significant features that are still not quite there.  This is how it goes in product design.  You dream up the product you want, but you deliver the product you can create.  You just try to make these as close to each other as possible.  In any case, you need to make the hard decisions to work on the things that will actually work.

* Converge to an MVP
Most of you are past MVP stage, but for some of you, the MVP (Minimum Viable Project) remains the goal.  A bunch of features, no matter how cool, may not be a term project.  There has to be a cohesive user experience.  Your mentor can help you figure out what that means in your case.  But keep your eye on that prize.  Get the MVP working.  If you do not have an MVP, do not work on anything that is outside of its narrow confines.
 
* Maybe start over, even now...
For a very small group of you, even given this super-late date, your best bet may well be to start over, and focus on producing a small, working arcade-style game that is still perhaps doable to some extent.  It's too late for you to make this decision on your own, without your mentor's explicit approval (by email, not just verbally).  But if you think you may be in this group, please contact your mentor right away, and the two of you will work together to decide this.  Just know that even now it is certain that several of you should make this decision.

* Backup, backup, backup!!!
Every semester, at least one student seems to suffer some sort of computer or hard drive or other such failure that leads to them losing lots of code.  Ugh!  And while we very much sympathize with students in that situation, we cannot give extensions for hardware or backup failures.  So plan accordingly!  You cannot control whether or not hardware will fail.  But you can control whether or not you backed up properly before then.  So do it!  Backup, backup, backup.  And backup some more!  We highly recommend that you create a folder of backups, and just keep adding full copies of your entire project to that folder, with a naming scheme like "project-backup-28-nov-2014-10am" or some such.  I'd add a full copy practically once on the hour, but several times each day in any case.  And it's way better if these are stored off your computer, ideally in Google Drive or DropBox or some such, but on a USB drive would be ok.  Computers die.  You do not want your project to die with it.  So backup copiously.

* Attend Tuesday's (required) user-study-a-thon
Tuesday's lecture is not optional.  Attendance will be taken, and folded into your tp3 score (so, really, it's just free points).  Everyone should bring your laptop and/or whatever else you need to demo your project.  You will demo it to each other working in small groups, and then do little "user studies", recording each other's reactions and thoughts and ideas about your projects.  Then you have to close the loop, at least a little bit, and refine your design at least in some small way based on what you learned.  This is known as "iterative design".  Ideally, we'd have much longer for this project, and you could do careful user studies, followed by significant design changes, additional dev cycles, and then more user studies, iterating until the process converges on a fabulous project.  Ideally.  But here we have little time, so we do that whole "iterative design process" in a day!  :-)   Still, it works surprisingly well, and is far better than omitting it.  So show up Tuesday with an open mind, ready to try to help your classmates improve their projects, and ready to accept their help in improving yours.

* Finish all coding by Wednesday (or earlier)
You do not want to be coding on Thursday.  Really.  Even Wednesday is really, really late for that.  Coding late in the process carries significant risks.  You might break things that were working.  You might lose precious time that you needed for packaging and submitting your project.  Or you might just lose time, period, where you code a lot but do not converge to something submittable.  And this week is just too busy to lose large blocks of time that way.  So: plan to finish coding as early as possible.  The sooner, the better.

* Leave time for the video
This is a common mistake.  Do not start trying to learn how to make a screencast video 20 minutes before the deadline!  Today is a fine day to learn how to do that.  It's actually really easy on a Mac:  run the QuickTime Player, choose File / New Screen Recording, and then you are basically in business.  You could use various video editors to nice it up, but really, the requirement would be satisfied with any semi-decent video. (though do nice it up if you have the time and inclination, since this video should hopefully be of high lasting value for you even years after you complete the project).

* And also leave time to upload the video!
There is a hidden risk here:  it can take a  long time to get a video uploaded to YouTube (or wherever else you choose to host your video).  Sometimes, hours.  And we cannot grant extensions for this.  So be sure to get those videos uploaded as early as possible!!!

* Do not cheat!
This is when it happens.  Some of you do not have enough done, or feel you don't anyhow, and the deadline is fast approaching.  This is when poor judgment overtakes reason.  Don't do it.  Even if you are in the unfortunate situation where you may not pass the term project at this time, there remain good options.  One may be to start over (see above).  But the other is just to do your level best, honestly, and accept the outcome, whatever it may be.  This is way, way, way better than submitting someone else's code as your own, and then failing the course, and facing serious additional consequences, perhaps including a year or more suspension from CMU.  Nobody, nobody wants that.  Don't do it.  If you are feeling stuck, with no good options, then please come talk to us.  We are here for you.  We may not be able to make everything all better, but we sure can help you down the best path for the best outcome available, whatever that may be at this point.

* Do not miss the deadline!
We have said it many times:  there are no extensions on the term project, not even for a few hours, not even for very good reasons (well, except the obvious university-approved kind).  So please bear this in mind, and please do not miss the deadline.  You need to submit what you have, whatever it is.  And submit it to Autolab (we do not accept submissions any other way).  If it's too large, follow the instructions carefully and pare it down (usually by reducing your media somehow, just be sure to include all your original code and design docs), submit that to Autolab, and then find another separate way to get the whole submission to your mentor.  But be sure to get your tp3 submission into Autolab by the posted deadline.  Only Autolab submissions are actual submissions.  Email does not count.
 
* Double-check your submission
Let's all please be sure that the zip file you submit actually contains your project!  After you submit, please go to another computer, login to Autolab, download the zip file you submitted, and verify that it all looks good.  Broken zip files will result in a minimum of a penalty (which is an un-fun way to lose points after all that hard work), but in some cases may result in us not accepting your term project at all.  Ugh!  This is easily avoidable.  So please double-check your submission before the deadline.
 
* Do not get discouraged!
While some of you are clearly producing truly awesome projects, many of you are facing the realities that conceiving, designing, and building a project is just really, really hard, especially in 3 or 4 weeks.  And so the project you have now is maybe much less ambitious than the one you dreamed up a few weeks ago.  Also, many of you have said that you wished you could start over now, since you have learned so much about how not to design your project!  This is all good.  This is exactly the learning that you were supposed to get out of this project.  All of this will help you a great deal when you move into your next projects, in your next courses, and in your next internships, and so on.  This knowledge comes at a high price, but you've paid it, and you are better off for it.  Do not get discouraged by the two-steps-forward-one-step-back nature of a project.  It's how it works.  Embrace it.  Also, know this:  while you know the difference between your original plans and your final project, nobody else does!  They just get to see the outcome, and for nearly all of you, that will still be a lovely, compelling project that you can be very proud of, and that will serve you very well in your job hunts and in general in your futures.  So don't get discouraged.  Keep you chin up.  And finish as strong as possible.

* Have fun!
Not only should you not get discouraged, you should in fact have fun with your project.  Really.  For most of you, you are putting the final touches on your first significant software artifact of your own design and creation.  And that's just really cool.  Be proud of it.  Enjoy it.  Don't stress over it.  Stress won't help anyhow.  Just do what you can, polish it up and make it as pretty and lovely and "you" as possible.  Just keep this in perspective, and have fun with it.

* Stay healthy!
Following on the preceding theme, you need to stay healthy this week and into finals.  Get your sleep. Really.  Continue to eat right, and exercise, and socialize at least a bit, and keep your balance.  Unsurprisingly, I have seen many hundreds of students flatly ignore this advice at this stage, and push super-humanly hard to the finish line.  The thing is, they are human, not super-human, so that plan fails.  In fact, it goes extremely poorly in some cases.  I have seen students take wonderful projects and simply trash them by mismanaging these last few days.  By heroically taking on the undoable, they simply pushed themselves past their limits, and basically wrecked themselves and also wrecked their projects.  Ugh and double ugh.  So don't do that!  Really!  Get your sleep, keep your balance, and do what you can within the resources you can healthily give to this.  You've been working so hard on this course for 4 months now.  A few painful sleepless nights cannot really help your grade after all that hard work, but it sure could hurt it!  So go with the better plan, and get your sleep, and have some fun, and finish strong.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Gobble gobble!
gobble-gobble.py


TG and weekend plan
Hi again. So we are on the same page, here is the plan for this weekend.
 
The course will be entirely shut down all day Thursday.That means no email, piazza, or other supports for tomorrow. I hope everyone enjoys this day off, and that you all have a lovely holiday, spending lots of time with good friends and family.
 
Aside from tomorrow, the course continues. However, we will have somewhat reduce supports today and through Sunday. We will have office hours according to the schedule that Jordan posted, and we will support piazza as best we can in this time.
 
As I've mentioned before, this is a really important weekend for your term project. I understand that many of you have traveled far to be with your family, which is a fine thing.  But even so you should find a way to make solid progress on your term project this weekend. There are many hours in a day, and you should be able to spend eight or more of them with your family and friends, yet still have some time left over to make progress on your term project.  For most of you, you will probably be able to spend a great deal more time with your friends and family in just a few weeks. After all, the term project is due just 8 days from now, and our final exam is just 5 days after that!  So while we all should definitely enjoy this holiday, we need to keep ourselves focused on finishing the semester strong.
 
Enjoy the holiday, and be productive, and safe travels.
 
Gobble gobble.
 
David

tp2 deadline, 8pm sharp tonight
Hi all. This is a reminder that the tp2 deadline is tonight at 8pm sharp and again there will be no extensions.  Please be certain to submit whatever you have to autolab prior to that time. Good luck wrapping up this part of your project.
 
I hope your projects are coming along very well. From what I've seen, this is true for most of you. And some of you already have some truly spectacular projects. Great job!
 
Keep up the good work.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

My OH today (2-4pm)
Hi all.  Please note that my OH today will run from 2-4pm.  Thanks!
 
David

Tomorrow's lecture (!otpyrC no nadroJ)
Hi all.  Here's the scoop on tomorrow's lecture:  it will be an optional/bonus lecture (not a lab, so no computers) on Cryptography (from a historical perspective through some modern techniques) led by our Head CA, Jordan.   This is a fascinating topic and it's a nice chance for you to work with Jordan directly (he has provided endless and utterly invaluable help behind the scenes for all of you all semester long!).
 
It's also a chance for some modest bonus:  those in attendance (and paying attention, of course!) will earn +5 points of bonus on quiz9.  Speaking of which, your quiz9 grade will be 100 less 25 points for each missed required event from last week (or 0 if you missed all 3), plus tomorrow's +5 bonus for those who attend.  We expect the median to be 105, of course.  :-)
 
The topic is also optional in that it will not appear on the final exam.  Even so, it's great stuff, and I think you would really enjoy it.
 
Carpe diem.

David

tp1 grades and comments are posted
Hi all.  Thanks to the CA's, your tp1 grades and comments are now available in autolab.  It's brief and helpful reading, so please do look over the comments and take them to heart.
 
Tp1 is meant to get your exploratory work completed and get you focused on an effective project.  That's done.  Tp2 has the separate goal of ensuring that you are making lots of solid, concrete progress on that project.
 
90% of the tp grade lies ahead.  So no matter how tp1 went, you have time to do a solid project and secure a solid grade.  But now is the time to be sure to make steady progress every day.  If anything is preventing you from doing so, please meet with your mentor today to discuss.
 
Good luck with your projects!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

tp1 citation errors (required and critical reading)
Hi all.  We are processing about a half dozen "citation errors" for tp1, where students submitted blocks of code clearly based on online sources which they did not cite.  At this time, we are presuming these are accidental omissions, and giving the students the chance to remedy these errors, and as such we are assessing sizable penalties but not summarily failing the students involved.  They are very fortunate that they did not just fail the course.
 
But everyone must take this as a clear warning:  what we are calling "citation errors" in tp1 will be called "cheating" in tp2 or tp3, and will result in you summarily failing the course, along with a letter to the Dean of Student Affairs (and our dean, and your dean, and your advisor).
 
You must cite the code you use.  Each time.  Right in your code, like so:
 
  # Taken verbatim from:
  # www.somewhere.com/code-for-your-112-term-project.html
 
Or this:
 
  # Taken with minor changes from:
  # www.anotherplace.come/copymecopymecopyme.html
 
Or this:
 
  # Based somewhat loosely on:
  # www.thirdplace.com/reallynicestartercode.html
 
You get the idea.  In any case, this is the bottom line, taken straight from the term project writeup:
 
make it abundantly clear what is yours and what is not
 
There can be no confusion over what we mean by that.  The term "abundantly clear" is, well, abundantly clear.
 
It must be that anyone can glance at your code and instantly and easily know precisely what is yours and what is not.
 
Do that and you are fine.
 
Good luck with your projects.
 
David

Sample Steganography solutions from Thursday
Hi all.  Here are some sample solutions from Thursday's lecture+lab on steganography:
steganographyEncoderWithText.py
steganographyDecoderWithText.py
 
For the final, again we will not expect the same level of understanding on these topics as you'd have for the mainline topics that were covered in lecture+recitation+hw+quiz+midterm.  But we would expect you to answer straightforward questions either on the image-in-image steganography in the notes or the string-in-image steganography we did in class.

Carpe diem.

David

Contest / Puzzle hunt
Hi all.  Some of you are asking about the contest/puzzle hunt.  As noted before, today was more of a placeholder in the schedule.  The actual date is tbd.  We'll discuss briefly in class Tuesday to find a day/time that works well for the most people who would be interested in participating.
 
In any case, it's not today.  So that leaves more time to focus on your term projects!!!
 
Carpe diem.

David

Flu shots
Hi all.  This is not quite a 112 thing, but it really sort of is, since you can't do 112 (or anything else) if you have the flu.  So:  get your flu shots!

Term Projects: MVP! Write core functionality! Avoid bright shiny objects!
Hi again.  Here's a bit more TP advice.  This is a critical week for your term project.  This week is when you should build out your core functionality.  Do not get distracted by anything else.  So this is not the week to make your graphics just-so, to add spash screens and help screens, even to stop your code from crashing with some regularity.  No.  This is the week to get the most central functionality basically working.
 
In industry, the term MVP or Minimum Viable Product, is often used to focus work at this stage.  For now, you need to ask this question:  "Is it all possible to have a term project without doing what I am doing right now?"  If the answer is "yes", stop doing it!  You'd be amazed how helpful this can be, because in the end you can have a project with very little functionality, as long as it's the right functionality, and hangs together as a cohesive project (even if it is lacking all kinds of desirable features and polish, that yes, would make it nicer and also drive up the grade, but still, which is not required for a passing project).
 
The bright shiny object syndrome happens at this stage, and I've seen several of you suffer from this of late.  The issue is this:  you may now have some feature implemented that you really, really like, and that you are really, really enjoying working on, polishing, making it just wonderful.  But...  You may be doing this at the expense of making progress on the critical parts of your project.  So you can invest 30-40+ hours on a project, producing an incredibly wonderful polished feature, but not a cohesive project.  And that gets a 79 maximum.  Yikes!!!
 
So: put off all that polishing for later, no matter how attractive it may be at this time.   For now, eat your vegetables.  Dessert comes later.
 
This is Core Functionality Week.  Good luck with it!

David

Term Projects: Don't panic, and do make concrete progress
Hi all.  Most of you are making great strides now on your term projects.  It's heartening to see all your hard work translating into really promising if early results.  Keep at it!!!
 
That said, some of you are putting in all that effort but not enjoying the promising results yet.  Don't worry, this is ok.  Really.
 
But: for it to stay ok, you have to start making concrete progress now (today!).  So now is the time to drop anything that is an obstacle to progress.  This includes any extra modules, any complicated designs, anything at all that is preventing you from making steady progress each time you work on your project.
 
You can definitely start over completely right now (keeping your mentor in the loop, of course) and write a lovely Tkinter-based extra-module-free arcade game or other such project, without undue stress, and with high confidence for a solid grade.
 
We will receive many such submissions.  And that's fine!  Think about that.  Especially think about that if you've invested 10-20+ hours and do not have a lot to show for that effort to this point.
 
If you are making great progress, or even good progress, then just keep at it.  But if you are not, then please today, now, right now email your mentor and meet with them today and redefine your project however you need to so that you can make steady progress.  And by "steady progress" we mean "lots of working code converging on a working term project".
 
Good luck with it!
 
David

Mini-Lecture Review Form (optional, but encouraged)
Hi all.  We hope you enjoyed the mini-lectures this week!  Either way, though, we definitely wish to hear your thoughts, as we try to improve the 112 experience in the future.

To that end, can you please fill out this optional (and short!) mini-lecture review form, say by tonight?
 
Thanks!
 
And Carpe Diem!!!
 
David

Minor Autolab grade weirdness (midterm2 late day + tpz)
Hi all.  Here are a couple minor Autolab grading weirdness issues for those who may have noticed.  The first effect is minor, the second one is larger, in that Autolab was temporarily misreporting semester grades at around a 20-point deduction!
 
* Some midterm2 scores were being reported as having 1 late day (though at no penalty).  I have no idea why.  But this was fixed (by telling Autolab the midterm occurred one day later than it really did... sigh...).
 
* Once tp1 was activated, Autolab was folding your term project scores (which currently are all 0's) into your semester average.  As a result, semester scores were artificially depressed by around 20 points.  Ugh.  To fix this temporary artifact, I changed the category from tp to tpz, so Autolab will ignore your tp1, tp2, and tp3 when computing your semester average.  Obviously, after tp3 grades are entered, I'll switch the category back to tp, so you can see your real semester average computation.
 
Sorry for the confusion.
 
David

Verify your Autolab submission!
Hi again.  Every semester, we get tp submissions that are not valid zip files.  This is unfortunate.  In some cases, we allow a resubmission at a penalty.  In other cases, depending on circumstances, we do not (and then all the points are lost).
 
Ugh.
 
You should be certain that you are not in this situation, and that your zip file that you submitted is actually a valid zip file that actually contains your project.
 
For that, we recommend:
 
After you submit, go to a different computer (say, in a cluster; though a friend's laptop is fine), and login to Autolab, and view your handin, download it, unzip it, and verify that it contains your project as you thought you submitted.  Then be sure to also logout of Autolab.
 
If you don't go to another computer, the check is not as complete, but you can do this on your own computer for some measure of confidence.
 
In any case, please be sure to verify that your submission seems valid to you.
 
Once again, good luck with it!

David

Submit tp1 in Autolab, not email, and as a single zip file
Hi again.  You need to submit tp1 in Autolab, and definitely not via email (if your submission is oversized, you still must submit a reduced-size version of it in Autolab by the deadline).
 
Also: it must be a single zip file.  To do this, place your original code and supporting documents, etc, in a folder, and then zip that folder.  On a Mac, you can ctrl-click and choose "Compress".  On a PC, you may be able to right-click and "Send To" then "Compressed (zipped) folder".
 
If you have any questions or concerns about how to zip files, you need to get those resolved prior to submitting!  Like, now would be a fine time for that.
 
Good luck again.
 
David

tp1 (and tp2 and tp3): No late submissions!
Hi all.  Please be certain to submit whatever you have by the 8pm deadline tonight.  Better yet, earlier, since the deadline is 8pm sharp.
 
We will not accept late submissions.  Those will receive 0 of the 10 points available for tp1.
 
No matter what you have at the time, just submit what it is.
 
Of course, this does not apply to the usual university-approved conflicts, such as pre-approved extensions for athletic or academic events, confirmed medical emergencies, etc.
 
Good luck wrapping up tp1.
 
David
 
Reminder: 2 mini-lectures tonight
Hi again.  There are 2 mini-lectures tonight (well, one is almost over):
 
      Tue 8pm: A: Data Analysis + Data Visualization in R [Sunny] 
      Tue 9pm: B: Graph Algorithms [Evan + Ben] 
 
Great stuff!   I hope some of you make it.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Sample Monte Carlo solutions from today
Hi all.  Fun times today.  :-)
 
Here are some sample solutions:  monteCarloLab.py
 
Again, any of these problems (or close variants) might appear on the final exam:
   * from the notes:
      * findingPi
      * diceOdds
      * theBirthdayProblem
   * from the lab:
      * relativePrimeOdds
      * yahtzeeOdds
      * montyHallOdds
 
Enjoy!
 
David

university-approved absences from CA-led lectures
Hi all.  As with all course events, we are happy to accommodate people with university-approved conflicts.  So if you have courses, or labs, or swim practice, or whatever at all those times, no worries.  Just please email me listing the reason for all the conflicts.  But if you can make one of the times, then you should attend that time.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Lecture+Lab topics may be on final, mini-lectures not
Hi again.  For your final exam planning purposes, the topics in the main lecture+labs this week and next (such as Monte Carlo, tomorrow) will (or at least may) appear on the final exam.  The mini-lecture topics will not.
 
David

Mini-Lectures this week (attend any 1 of your choice)
Hi again.  This week we'll try something new. The CA's will be leading 1-hour-long mini-lectures on a variety of interesting topics (and Prof Ada will lead one, too!).  Everyone must attend any one of these.  Pick one that sounds interesting.  Please be on time and please pay attention!  Attendance will be taken, and attending any one of these will earn you the last 25% of 'quiz9'.  No extra credit for attending more than one, but feel free to do so.  There are a bunch of interesting topics.
 
Here is the bunch of interesting topics, all in 7500 WEH:
 
      Tue 8pm: A: Data Analysis + Data Visualization in R [Sunny] 
      Tue 9pm: B: Graph Algorithms [Evan + Ben] 
      Wed 6pm: C: Quantum Computing [Anil] 
      Wed 7pm: D: Advanced Image Processing [Tim] 
      Wed 8pm: E: Parallel algorithms/functional programming [Sunny] 
      Wed 9pm: F: Machine Learning [Xiaote] 
      Thu 8pm: G: Robotics [Alex + Andrew] 
      Thu 9pm: H: Arduino and Raspberry Pi [Tommy] 
 
Also, note that recitation is optional (just like last week, they'll be staffed all day for term project OH), so this extra hour does not add to your weekly load!  Anyhow, we hope you enjoy this experiment, and that it gives you some exposure to the richest variety of interesting intermediate-level topics possible.
 
Enjoy!
 
David


Lectures this week and next
Hi all.  Each of the next 3 lectures (tomorrow, Thu, next Tue) will be self-contained "Lecture+Labs".  Attendance is required.  Please bring your laptops.
 
The plan is to first do a short lecture on a topic, then you will work in small groups (2-3) on a related problem, and then we'll review the solution, then take a mini-quiz.  Sort of like a week compressed into 80 minutes.
 
The mini-quiz is really just to take attendance, which again is required.  But you'll get credit for being there.  "Quiz9" now exists.  To score 100% on quiz9, you just need to attend each of the 3 lectures, plus one of the other mini-lectures this week.  See the next post about that.
 
Tomorrow we'll cover Monte Carlo methods with some non-zero probability.  Fun stuff.
 
Carpe diem.

David

hw10 grades
Hi all.  The hw10 grades are posted now.  Given that we had to invest a lot of grading time into the midterm exams, style grading on hw10 was limited to Magic Numbers, Variable Names, MVC, Ownership, and Line Length.  Average style deduction was 2 pts.  Let's get that even lower for your term projects!
 
Good style == free points!!!!
 
And with that, hw's are now completely done for this semester.  Great job, everyone!  And great job, CA's, with all your grading!  And keep up the great work on your term projects.  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David

Interested in joining the 112 team and CA'ing in s15? (responses due tonight!)
Hi all.  Do you want to CA 112 in the spring?
 
Do you love to teach?  Do you love to code?  Do you love to help others?  Did you score an "A" on at least one of our midterms, and preferably both of them?  Are you about to do a really nice term project?  Basically, are you shining in this course and now wanting to help others shine, too?
 
If you answered "yes" to all these questions, please reply to me tonight by email.  Interviews start tomorrow and run this week!  Those who reply will receive separate communication from me to set up an interview time.
 
Also, you should know that this is a very competitive process, typically with around 10 applicants per open position.  Even so, we very much welcome all qualified applicants.  The only way to have an awesome staff is to start with an awesome applicant pool.
 
So if you are interested, please let me know.  Again, tonight!
 
Thanks!!!!!!
 
And...  Carpe diem!!!
 
David

Midterm2 grades
 
Hi all.
 
Thanks to the heroic efforts of our CA?s (thanks, CA?s!), the midterms are now graded.  The results were? Interesting.
 
Actually, they were quite good overall.  For example, the median on the last 2 free response questions was over 82%.   That?s great.
 
But there was a weirdness:  Hanoi in particular either went quite well or very poorly for most everyone.  Many people scored nearly 0 on that problem but otherwise did quite well on the exam.
 
We believe the performance on the non-Hanoi part of the test is more representative of what you have learned so far.  However, we can't just drop the Hanoi problem, as some students actually did better on Hanoi than on other parts, and they should not be penalized in any way.
 
And so?  Here is the policy:  your raw score on midterm2 is the MAXIMUM of either your base raw score (out of 100), or your score by ignoring Hanoi and dividing by 85 (to get another score out of 100).  Your exams will show BOTH of these raw numbers, with the larger one circled.  That is your raw score.
 
The raw median was a very respectable 79.  We added 3 points to that to get the adjusted raw median of 82. As usual, your adjusted score is entered in Autolab.
 
The top adjusted score, by the way, was 109 (wow!).  And fully 16 students received an adjusted score over 100.  Excellent!
 
As usual, graded exams will be returned in recitation.  Meanwhile, let?s hope you are making fabulous strides on your term projects.
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

Alternate Final Exam Sign-Up Form (due Sunday)
Hi all.
 
Our final exam is scheduled for Tue, 9-Dec, 5:30-8:30pm.
 
This post is for those with conflicts with our final.  It is not for students who qualify for extra time (those students should follow the usual protocol and schedule their final exam directly with Larry Powell's office).
 
This form is only for students who have a university-approved conflict with our final exam, which means either another final at the exact same time, or 2 other finals both within 25 hours of our final (making 3 total finals in 25 hours). No other exceptions will be considered.
 
If you qualify for one of these two cases, then please fill out this form today, but by Sunday (16-Nov) in any case. Based on these responses, we will select an alternate final exam date and time (some time after our regularly-scheduled final exam), which we will then announce (to those who qualify for it) probably sometime next week.
 
Thanks.

David

Mentor assignments!
Hi all.  The mentor assignments are completed.  The lottery went well, with nearly everyone getting one of their top choices.  You should hear from your mentors soon, and by the end of today in any case.
 
Meanwhile, I hope you are making great progress on your term projects.  This weekend is a really important one so you get off on the right foot and make great headway.
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

Microsoft support for students using Kinects and/or C# in term projects
Hi all.  This is totally cool.  If it applies to you, you should take advantage of it.  Brian Sherwin, who helped run the Microsoft Kinect Workshop last month, has kindly offered to help with questions students might have with their Kinect-based and/or C#-based term projects.  Check this out for details (and thanks, Brian!):

On the virtues of reading
Hi all.  About a dozen of you filled out the Mentor Request Form by providing your first name in the "name" field, and then your last name in the "andrew id" field.  Sigh.
 
To make matters worse, many of you who did this used nicknames rather than the names in our roster.  And since we have numerous duplicate last names, I was left to literally guess who you are.  Joy!
 
Reading is really good for you.  It can be just so handy, too!  It makes strings of written words so much more interesting!  It helps you tell the difference, say, between "last name" and "andrew id".  Or maybe to read signs such as "Danger: roving bands of rabid armadillos ahead!"  Or this:
 

 
Reading.  It's not just for breakfast anymore.
 
David

Choose mentors, not debuggers!
Hi all.  We are getting a bunch of questions of the form: Which CA's know about ____________?
 
This is a well-intentioned but accidentally ill-formed question for choosing a mentor, and I hope this post puts an end to such questions.
 
As we've discussed here and in lecture, mentors are not going to provide substantive support for your project.  This is for two reasons.  The main reason is that you need to show that you can make something substantial chiefly without our help.  You still get to use all the other resources the world has to offer (with proper citation, of course), but this time without our CA's providing much help.  This is the exit criterion for the course, that you can do a project basically on your own.  So it's really important that we not help too much.  But the other reason we don't is simple math:  we simply can't.  Now that you are each doing different projects, and your projects are large and complex, we have nowhere near the resources to give each of you the kind of time it would take to support you in anything like the manner we have supported you up to this point.  But, of course, this is not a problem, since the goal is for you to do this on your own.
 
Of course, mentors do play an important role in your projects, both in guiding you to make good decisions in terms of what you choose to do and how you choose to do it, and also in grading your results.  So choose your mentor wisely based on those considerations.
 
Anyhow, please do not inquire as to which CA's have expertise in which areas.  Choose the mentor you like to work with, whose advice and guidance ("mentoring") you might value, and not one that you think might help your debugging.
 
Good luck with your projects!

David

computeAMG (in Python)
# computeAMG (who needs spreadsheets?)
# for those who may be interested in where they stand, AMG-wise...
#
# Naturally, replace the hw, quiz, and midterm scores with your own,
# and then replace the final and tp scores with your projections.
# You need 69.5 on the AMG weighting (as computed below) for a C.
# Note that AMG is never used for A's or B's at the semester.
# Good luck!
#
scores = {
    "hws": [83, 72, 55, 21, 0, 8, 16, 94, 84, 71],
    "quizzes": [44, 61, 22, 73, 58, 49, 77, 62 ],
    "midterms": [48, 62],
    "final": 68,
    "tp": 80
    }
 
def computeAMG(scores):
    bestNavg = lambda scores, n: 1.0*sum(sorted(scores)[-n:])/n
    best5hws = bestNavg(scores["hws"], 5)
    best5quizzes = bestNavg(scores["quizzes"], 5)
    bestMidterm = bestNavg(scores["midterms"], 1)
    amg = round(0.25 * scores["final"] +
                0.15 * bestMidterm +
                0.10 * best5quizzes +
                0.20 * best5hws +
                0.30 * scores["tp"], 1)
    print amg
    if (amg >= 69.5): print "You made it!"
    else: print "Maybe try for a higher TP grade?"
    return amg
 
computeAMG(scores)

Recitation tomorrow: optional, all-day term project OH!
Hi all.  Recitation is optional tomorrow.  You may attend any or all of the sessions!  They will be staffed and the CA's will be happy to try to help with your term project ideas.
 
Note that all sessions tomorrow will meet in GHC 5205 (as 5201 is closed for renovations).
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

Term Project Mentor SIgn-Up Form (due tonight!)
Hi all.  It's time to get going on the term projects!  As a first step, please fill out this form.  It is due by 11:59pm tonight.
 
The form is optional in that if you do not make a mentor request, one will be randomly assigned to you. Please fill it out exactly once.
 
Also: if you wish to be sure, check out the CA pictures online here:
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112/staff-photos/staff-photos.html
 
We may not be able to accommodate everyone's first or even second request, but we will do our best. Plus, requests for Mentors who are in your assigned recitation will be given priority, but even then it may not be possible to satisfy all such requests. Again, we'll do our best!
 
The form is due on Thu Nov 13th by 11:59pm.
 
TP Mentors will be assigned tomorrow morning, and you should hear by email from your assigned Mentor sometime tomorrow.  From that point forward, while your recitation CA's are surely happy to help how they can, realistically they will be very busy supporting their own assigned mentees, and the main guidance role for your term project will be from your assigned mentor.
 
Good luck on your projects!
 
David

Reminder: Midterm Locations (morning session in UC/McConomy)
Hi all.  I hope you are off to a good start on this fine day!  :-)
 
So you all show up at the right place at the right time:

* The 10:30am session, open to everyone in either lecture, is in UC/McConomy.
 
* The 3pm session, open only to lecture 2, is in DH 2315 (the usual 3pm room).
 
* As usual, students who pre-qualify through Larry Powell's office for extra time should arrange directly with Larry Powell's office for proctoring.
 
* Also, wherever you take the exam, please sit every other seat.
 
Once again, good luck today!
 
David

Time for sleep
Hi all.  The time to study is past.  And now, easily the best thing you can do for your mind and your body, not to mention your grade, is to sleep.  Maybe spin down with 30 minutes or so of socializing or chilling or whatever.  But then.... Sleep.

Sleep, sleep, sleep......
 
Then more sleep.
 
Then a good breakfast, a brisk walk, and give it the ol' college effort on the midterm.
 
Also, wear your longjohns and your parka to the exam if you want, but studies suggest you'll do better if you dress a bit lightly, keeping cool but not cold.  And partway through, take a short break and stretch, wiggle your toes, wiggle your nose, keep the blood flowing.  And keep your humor.  Smiling helps.  No, really, it does.
 
And don't stress.  You've prepared as much as you have at this point.  You will do however you will do.  Being efficiently calm and relaxed and focused is easily your best bet.  Being stressed and unfocused is easily your worst bet.  Don't take your worst bet.  Relax.  You'll be fine.
 
But all that's tomorrow.  For tonight...  Go to sleep!!!
 
Carpe noctem.

David

112 Puzzle Hunt deferred
Hi all.  Due to conflicts with midterm exam grading, we have to push the 112 puzzle hunt back from this weekend.  It is tentatively listed for next weekend, but we'll figure out the actual date sometime soon (probably by a verbal poll on Tuesday).
 
This should give (some of) you some more time for your term projects this weekend, and this weekend is a really important weekend for term projects!  It is essential that you give yourself a solid headstart (fun!), rather than having to play catch-up under duress near the TP deadline (no fun!).  So use this weekend to make great strides on your projects!
 
You can do it!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw8 and hw9 grades posted (and time for midterm prep!)
Hi all.  As the subject line says, the grades for hw8 and hw9 are now posted (thanks, CA's!).  And as usual, you can ignore the "etc" entries in the Autolab gradebook -- all the scores that count are in the "hw" entries now.  As we move into the harder hw's, the medians naturally come down just a bit, as happened here.  But still, they remained fairly robust, with hw8 at 88.5 and hw9 at 85.  (Top scores were 100.5 on hw8 and 106 on hw9!)  Overall, the current hw average median is 91.1, and the current course median is a very robust 85.8, which is excellent for this stage of the course.  Great job, everyone!
 
Now it's time to set your sights on the upcoming midterm.  While the exam (like all quizzes and exams in this course) is comprehensive, so anything can be on it, I would strongly advise focusing your studies in this order:  recent quizzes, recent hw's, recent case studies, other recent course notes, then everything else, where "recent' means "since midterm1".  And I'd further recommend that you focus on the big ideas first.  Rather than study the nuances, it's far better to really understand the core material -- say, how to trace a recursive function, or how to subclass EventBasedAnimationClass, or how to write an __init__ for a subclass that overrides but also calls the super's __init__, and so on.  Once you have the basics down pat, then move on from there.
 
Also, be sure to get your sleep.  That's by far the best way to drive up your midterm score!  (Or, if the converse is more motivational for you:  the easiest way to ruin your midterm score is to simply stay up too late tonight and tomorrow night...  So don't!!!).  And keep your stress down.  Sleep right, eat right, exercise (yes, even today and tomorrow!).  The better you treat your body and your mind, the better they will perform for you.
 
Good luck on the exam.
 
David

Midterm #2 time and location (must read!)
Hi all.  So that everyone can sit every-other-seat, we have reserved McConomy for the morning session this Thursday.  This means:
 
* Everyone in the 10:30am lecture should report at 10:30am to UC/McConomy for the midterm.  Do not report to our usual room!
 
* Everyone in the 3pm lecture who would like to rather take the exam in the morning is requested to do so.  We would prefer to have as many people as possible at the morning session.  Again, in UC/McConomy, starting at 10:30am.
 
* Anyone in the afternoon session who wishes to take the exam at their normal time and place may do so.  3pm in DH 2315.  This in only for 3pm students.  Students in the morning lecture must attend the morning exam session.
 
* As usual, students who pre-qualify through Larry Powell's office for extra time should arrange directly with Larry Powell's office for proctoring.
 
* Also, wherever you take the exam, please sit every other seat.
 
Thanks, and good luck on the exam!
 
David

Updated eventBasedAnimationClass.py (fixed crash-on-exit)
Hi all.  Many of you were noticing that your SameGame apps would crash on exit.  This is fine -- you can safely ignore it, and we'll ignore it, too.
 
Even so, it's a nuisance.  And maybe it's also a thing of the past.  I just posted an updated version of eventBasedAnimationClass.py that hopefully remedies this problem.  You can download it from the notes or here:
  http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112/notes/eventBasedAnimationClass.py
 
Just replace your current copy with this one and that's it (hopefully).
 
Again, no action required for hw10, but you might use this version (or a modified form of it) for your term projects.
 
Enjoy!
 
David

Please verify your section in autolab is correct (fixes due today)
Hi all.  For a variety of reasons, it is important that the section/recitation listed in autolab is in fact the one that you are regularly attending.
 
For example, this influences the pending term project mentor selection process.  But it also helps us balance our resources properly across sections, among other virtues.
 
Please verify this now.  Please go to autolab, select "Account", and verify your assigned section.
 
If it is wrong, please email Jordan (jzink) now, listing the section you actually have been regularly attending.  Please cc your CA's (of the section you have been regularly attending).
 
For those who need to make corrections, this email is due today, so we can get started with the mentor selection process as early as tomorrow.
 
Thanks!
 
David

Don't set timer delay to None, and don't worry about errors after closing the window
Hi all.  There are two hints for you.
 
First, don't set the timer delay to None (though if you did so and you got it working, great).  Instead, keep the timer firing, but on the first line of onTimerFired, check if the game is over, and if so, just do nothing.  Easy peasy.
 
And many of you are seeing this error when the window closes:
 
invalid command name "33682856callit"
while executing
"33682856callit"
("after" script)
 
You can safely ignore this.  We sure will!  :-)

David

More cheating on hw10 already...
Hi all.  It's hard to imagine, but...  Of the 17 submissions we have so far in hw10, already there is a case of copy-paste-edit cheating. Unbelievable.
 
As is often the case, it's not the whole file, it's just the hard parts (for example, the adapted floodFill).  And of course, that is still very much cheating.
 
Consider:
   * Hw10 is all-solo.
And
   * We just made a long, serious post about cheating.
 
As you might imagine, any cheating on hw10 (including the one case we already have now) will face serious consequences.
 
Also, though not directly related to this incident, it's worth repeating that on your term projects, if you copy-paste-edit-and-fail-to-cite any code, you will summarily fail the course.
 
Please let's make this case the LAST case of cheating this semester.  Even among the 17 who have submitted so far, 15 did not cheat.  So that means even now, around 90% are not cheating.  But I think we can get that up to 100% for everyone else who submits hw10.  I think every last one of you can manage to not cheat from here on out.  I really do think this.  I have full faith in you.  Now, please let it be so.
 
Today is the last day of 15-112 hw ever for you (well, tomorrow if you take the late-day).  Good luck wrapping it up.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Required reading: hw8 + hw9 cheating incidents
Hi all.  We are chagrined to report that we have detected a large number of cheating cases both for hw8s and for hw9s.  Based on historical precedence, we knew that having collaborative portions of the hw would predictably drive up the cheating on the solo portions (sad, but true).  But this level of cheating is in fact nearly unprecedented in 15-112.
 
Were these all-solo hw's, the offenders would typically face a one-letter-grade drop and a letter to the Dean of Student Affairs (though decisions are per-offense, and some offenders might face additional consequences).  Note that two such letters typically results in a years' suspension or longer from CMU.
 
We could definitely apply the same consequence to everyone in this situation.  That would be a reasonable outcome, and in fact one might argue it is the most reasonable outcome.
 
Instead, however, we will take into account the broader context of the partly-collaborative hw, and the fact that these cases were only partial copies (so offending students did submit a lot of original work), and further that so many students cheating indicates some sort of systemic failure.  So we will consider these as mitigating factors.
 
Even so, offenses did occur, and consequences shall be faced by all those involved.
 
In particular: those who were involved shall receive an email today confirming your involvement.  This will be coupled with a 3-point drop in your semester course average (though we reserve the right to change this outcome if any further evidence comes to light).  If you wish to appeal this outcome, you may do so by sending me an email today stating so.  In response, we will send a formal letter to the Dean of Student Affairs, thereby giving you a formal matter to formally appeal.  If your appeal succeeds, the consequence and the letter will be withdrawn.  If not, both will apply (along with any additional consequences levied by the Dean of Student Affairs, who has wide discretion to do so).
 
You should know that we have carefully reviewed each offense, and we are 100% certain that cheating occurred in every one of these cases.  We are not sure how it occurred, if answers were sent by email or Facebook or just copied from another screen or printout.  But we have matched each consumer to a specific provider, and carefully identified the offending portions of code within each offending pair, so we are certain cheating occurred.  So if you wish to argue otherwise, you will have to do so in a formal setting involving the Dean of Student Affairs.  Again, let me know today by email if you wish to pursue this path.
 
You should also know that this evidences seriously poor judgment on your part.  We will not explore the ethics of this further, except to say that this was a serious breach, inconsistent with the expectations of integrity that CMU expects and demands from all our students.  You simply have to do better, ethically speaking.  Which is to say:  if you cannot finish the hw on time, then don't.  Just submit what you have, the best work you can do, given the time you have to do it.  And then accept the outcome, whatever it may be.  To cheat your way out of that situation is simply unacceptable.
 
Also: a number of these offenses involved students from previous semesters.  You should know that we could and perhaps should penalize them, and the standard penalty for an offense of this nature would be to retroactively drop their semester grade by one letter.  At this time, given everything detailed above, we will instead just send them an email indicating that we have confirmed their hw was involved in a cheating case this semester, and leave it at that (except, as above, we reserve the right to change this outcome if any new evidence comes to light).  Some of you seriously imperiled the academic standing of students who finished this course in some cases up to 2 years ago.
 
We still know that most of you have not cheated, do not cheat, and will not cheat.  We are not losing sight of that fact.
 
But we also have had confirmed cheating cases on the majority of hw's, as well as numerous quizzes, and the midterm.  Note that this trend is not restricted to 15-112, and has been observed in numerous other courses recently, too, suggesting that some broader cultural shift is occurring.  Regardless of the broader context, we are specifically in charge of 15-112, and we are deeply committed to its near-term and long-term effectiveness for all of you and all our future students.  So even as most of you are not cheating, enough of you are that we are going to seriously reconsider how this course is taught in the future.  One idea is to move all the points into proctored events (exams, quizzes, labs, etc), and design them such that the only way to do well is to seriously do the hw, but then allow arbitrary collaboration on the non-proctored hw.  Something like that.  We have other ideas, too.  And we will soon solicit ideas from you on this matter.  But that's all for future semesters. For this semester, we have to put an end once and for all to violations of the very clear and very easy-to-understand course policies on cheating and collaboration.
 
You all should also know that any cheating on midterm2, term projects, or the final exam would result in summarily failing the course, along with a letter to the Dean of Student Affairs.  We so very much hope that does not happen.
 
Most of you are not part of this cheating trend, and we apologize for this constant distraction.  For those who are or would be part of it: stop.  Now.
 
Let's get back to the important business of learning.  And hopefully having some fun all the while.
 
Sincerely,
 
Professors Anil Ada and David Kosbie

You do not have to do something unique to get an A
Hi again.  This is also important.  You do not need to do something unique to get an A.  We've had around 5 thousand term projects (!).  If they all had to be unique, gosh, that'd make it increasingly impossible for everyone to do well.  So that restriction simply does not exist.  Of course, we very much welcome unique projects, and many of our finest projects have been unique.  BUT...  It's fine to do a game or tool or other kind of program that someone else has already done.  Even a super-popular game is just fine.  In that case, it is nice if you add your own twists, and you do get credit for your own design decisions.  So you should do that.  But the basic idea can indeed be based on something well-known and not unique.
 
Bottom line:  we are going to get numerous Mario games, and a few chess games, and several racing games, and a couple Rubik's cube solvers, and so on, and that's all just fine.
 
Your project does not have to be unique, it just has to be unique TO YOU.  You can't just rehash something you've already done.  But that's it.  Do something new to you, and have fun with it!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

You do not need to use extra modules to get an A
Hi all.  As the subject line says: You do not need to use extra modules to get an A, or to create an awesome project, or to do really fun, cool, exciting things.
 
Of course, you do need to use extra modules to do certain kinds of fun, cool, and exciting things.  Yes.  So some of you may want to look into using such modules.

BUT...  If you are not making headway with them, or you just don't have any interest in such things, DON'T PANIC.  In fact, don't worry at all.  Just punt on extra modules, get to thinking about what kind of awesome you can create using nothing more than what you've already learned well.  You totally can do something unique and compelling and wonderful with nothing beyond Tkinter and the Python we've covered so far.
 
So: do be creative, and do try new things.  But if that does not work, do not worry.  At all.  Just continue to be creative, but using the tried and true techniques you already know.
 
Good luck with it.
 
And carpe diem.
 
David

Canopy for installing opencv, numpy, scipy, many other modules
Hi all.  As some of you are learning, it can be quite hard to properly install modules just to try to use them.  Definitely a shortcoming of Python.  Ugh.
 
There are tools to help, like pip, or easy_install, or homebrew, but all of these have proven to be complicated for many students, too.  Ugh.
 
One way around this, for many though certainly not all modules, is to use Canopy.  Canopy is not a version of Python, but rather a Python distribution, that includes Python along with a bunch of common modules, and with a Package Manager that makes it really easy to install more modules.  In particular, Canopy makes it really easy to get started with opencv, which makes it a popular option for some of our students.  Note that Canopy does not include pyGame, though, so if you wanted to use pyGame and opencv, well, Canopy is not the way to go.  Sigh.  Also note that installing Canopy usually does not but may play around with your paths, so that you may need to make some small adjustments in order to run both IDLE or Sublime as you do now, and to also be able to run Canopy.  If that happens, it is fixable, but you might want to go to OH for help with that.  Generally, installing Canopy is painless, and you wind up with two Pythons that are totally separate, the one you've been using all along, and the one in Canopy.  No problem.
 
To use opencv with Canopy (and of course, this same basic approach works for many other packages):
 
1) Download the *academic* version of Canopy from here.  Note that you must get the academic version of Canopy in order to get opencv included.
 
2) Run Canopy.
 
3) Select the "Package Manager"
 
4) Type "opencv" in the search box in the top-left
 
5) Select "opencv 2.4.9-1" (or whatever) in the list on the right
 
6) Click on the "install button".
 
7) Completely exit Canopy (yeah...)
 
8) Run Canopy
 
9) Choose Editor

Now you are using Canopy's IDE, which is very similar to IDLE.  At the top is the file you are editing (currently, none), and at the bottom is a shell (with the prompt "In [1]:").
 
10) In the shell at the bottom, type this line:
    import cv
If it does not raise an exception and just quietly goes to the next line, then you have successfully installed opencv.  Then go to the opencv Python tutorials and you're off and running!
 
Have fun!!!
 
David

# of colors in SameGame
Hi all.  The spec does not limit the # of colors, but there has been some conflicting advice here, so...  You can safely assume a max of 10 colors.
 
This was not the original intent, however.  So while you'll do fine limiting to 10, you might think how you wouldn't have that limitation.  You'd want to use the rgbString function, in some clever way, from the week2 graphics notes.  Not required at this point, but still a good exercise, and in any case just the sort of question one might ask on a midterm or final. :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

quiz8 grades
Hi all.  The CA's ended the semester with a perfect record of 1-day turnaround on quiz grading.  Thanks, CA's!!!  :-)
 
And the results for quiz8 are mostly promising.  The median is a solid 74, and 9 students scored 100 or higher (top score: 106!).
 
Overall, this means that you have learned a good deal about recursion, but it also means that you have your work cut out for you, to really cement this learning by the upcoming midterm.  Note that the midterm is in 6 days, and while it is a comprehensive exam, recursion will be featured prominently on it (along with the other intermediate topics we have covered since midterm1).
 
Also, about 15% of you scored 50 or lower.  If you are in that group, or nearly in that group, then you really need to get some tutoring asap, and to practice, practice, practice more recursion for the upcoming midterm.  Stick to the basic stuff first, like tracing.  It is easy to generate new tracing problems (right?), so you can practice these basically forever.  Once you can reliably do tracing, and also floodFill tracing, then perhaps move on to reasoning over code (find these online and in past semester quizzes and midterm2's).  Also, be sure you can solve the hw problems and the free responses from quiz8.  And be sure to carefully review the examples in the notes.  Finally, only then, if you have time, practice more free-response problems from previous hw's, quizzes, and exams.  But whatever you do, now is the time to do it!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

bind Motion events in initAnimation, not run
Hi all.  For hw10, you should not override the run() method.  Instead, override the initAnimation() method, and bind Motion events inside there.

We'll do exactly that in recitation today, too.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw10 and the term project are both posted!
Hi all.  With hw9 still out there, I doubt anyone really is needing to get a jump on either hw10 or their term projects.  So you can safely ignore this post for now (though just for now).
 
But if you do want to get started, hw10 is now posted.  You might also want to look over the term project spec, though we will review it in detail tomorrow in lecture.
 
Good luck wrapping up hw9.
 
And carpe diem!
 
David

My Thu OH --> Fri 4:30-6:30pm
Hi all.  I have to move my Thu OH (tomorrow's) one day back to Friday, 4:30pm to 6:30pm.  See some of you then!  :-)

Thanks.
 
David

quiz7 (with retake) grades now posted
Hi all.  The CA's wrapped up quiz7-retake grading (wow!), not to mention all of hw8 except for FarmGame (due tonight).  And...
 
The results were superb!  Most of you took quiz7-retake, and of those who did, 83% raised their quiz7 score by an average of 18 points.  So now the quiz7 median is a whopping 89.  Woohoo!
 
Your quiz7 grade in Autolab is now the max of your original quiz7 grade and your quiz7-retake grade.  As usual, graded quiz7-retakes will be returned this week in recitation.
 
Great job, folks!
 
David

Schedule changes
Hi all.  Given that hw9 is due so late this week, and also given that you really need time to study OOP and recursion (and, to a lesser extent perhaps, event-based programming) for the upcoming midterm2, we are making the following changes:
 
Brython will not be covered tomorrow, and will not be part of hw10 (it will be moved to one of those self-contained lecture+lab events, tentatively the first one though we might rearrange them as needed).

Hw10 will be posted either later today or perhaps tomorrow.  It will be lighter than usual, as promised.  And you have already seen basically all the material (except perhaps a bit of wrapping up to do tomorrow) that will be on hw10.  This also means you have now seen everything that will be covered on midterm2.  Any remaining material (Brython, Monte Carlo, Image Manipulation) may be on the final (in some small way), but not on midterm2.

Tomorrow, after quiz8, we will go over the formal term project assignment.

Tuesday we'll have another in-lecture CA-led midterm review, just as we did with midterm1.  This is still a required event.

We will also have optional midterm review sessions at least on Tuesday and Wednesday nights of next week.  Jordan will post the whole midterm prep schedule when it is available.

Thursday of next week of course is midterm2.  Good luck!

Next week's optional/advanced lecture (on Natural Language Processing) will be on Thursday night, 8-10pm.

We hope this schedule gives you the best chance to learn this material well and to do well on midterm2.
 
Carpe diem.

David

hw10 tp meetings
Hi all.  As with hw8, hw10 will include 5-minute TP meetings with one of your CA's (due by the hw10 deadline, Sunday at 10pm).  This time, you need to have a bit more thinking evidenced when you show up for your meeting.  This could be:

* A list of URL's to related projects, along with your written comments on each one as to which parts of those projects are most relevant and why
 
* A hand-drawn storyboard, showing in some detail what the user experience may be like for your project
 
* Some code artifacts, showing that you have made progress either getting some modules to work, or writing some prototyping code for your own project.
 
* Anything else along these lines.
 
The bar is low here.  We do not expect major progress.  But there is a bar of non-zero height -- we do expect some concrete progress.  This is to keep you moving along so that when the term project is formally assigned, you are in fact ready to dive in.
 
You should hear from your CA's today about scheduling these meetings.
 
As with the previous meetings, you need to be on time to get the points, etc.
 
This is a busy week.  We know that.  So don't stress over this.  But do put just a bit more thought into your term project ideas, and take the steps to produce some kind of concrete deliverables (such as those outlined above) to share with your CA in your meeting.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

A couple of nthHappyPrime hints
Hi all.  For those still working on nthHappyPrime, here are a couple of hints to get you started on this autumnal morning (for those who are done already, you can safely ignore these):
 
* Search for nthHappyPrime(n) starting from nthHappyPrime(n-1).  This will help reduce your recursion depth.  Also, since all happy primes are odd, step by 2's, not 1's.
 
* And be sure to use an adapted form of fasterIsPrime and not slowerIsPrime!
 
Hope this helps!

Carpe diem.
 
David

hw9c autograder and hw9s non-autograder
Hi all.  Remember: hw9c and hw9s must be submitted separately!  As with hw8, hw9c is in the etc category, and hw9s is in the hw category.
 
Hw9c's autograder is now live.  Enjoy!
 
Note that solveABC has been changed to manual grading (this will drive up grades, for what it's worth, since our CA's can give more partial credit than the autograder in general, and even more so for solveABC in particular).
 
And the second bonus is also manually graded now.
 
So that means that all of hw9s is manually graded.
 
When you submit it, Autolab will display a score of 0.  Don't worry, that just means that you scored 0 of the 0 total points available by autograding.  You're fine.
 
Good luck with both parts!  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David

Reminder: quiz7-retake is tomorrow
Hi all.  As the subject says: quiz7-retake is tomorrow, at the start of class.
 
To study for quiz7-retake, you should in particular study hw8 and quiz7.
 
Good luck on it!

David

Don't use nested functions, they are too hard to test and debug
Hi all.  We're seeing many of you suffering from the inability to easily test your helper functions in solveABC, because they are defined inside the outer function.  And then much of the yummy goodness of top-down design is lost, making debugging painful to impossible (since a bug in the outer function can in fact be anywhere inside any of the helper functions -- ugh!).  In fact, on multiple occasions I was slow to diagnose some problems in students' code recently until I de-nested the nested functions, and then I could almost instantly figure it out.  Hmmm....
 
So the way forward is easy to see:
 
1) Do not use nested functions (functions defined inside other functions)
 
and
 
2) Do test all your helper functions before using them.
 
Many hours have been lost by students not doing these things.
 
Note:  If you have solveABC solved, even with nested functions, then you do not have to change it.  Good job!
 
Hope this helps.
 
David

Do not use mutable values (like lists) to initialize default parameters!
Hi all.  Here is an important hint regarding a very strange Python behavior.  You should never use lists or other mutable values to initialize default parameters.  The outcome is weird.  To see this, check this out:
 
def f(x, a=[]):
    a.append(x)
    return a
print f(5)     # prints [5]
print f(6, []) # prints [6]
print f(7)     # prints [5, 7] <-- where did the 5 come from?!?
 
Ugh!
 
David
 
getCourse suggestions
Hi all.  Here are some important suggestions for getCourse, which is probably the hardest question in hw9 besides solveABC (and in fact the recursive part of getCourse is probably more challenging than the recursive part of solveABC, which is "just" backtracking):
 
Study listFiles() in the notes!
This problem is most like that one, so be sure you thoroughly understand how listFiles works first.  In particular, the nested lists in the problem are sort of like folders (right?), and the course names are sort of like file names (right?).

Solve it with a "for" loop first
This is not required, of course, but it's very helpful probably to first solve getCourse using a "for" loop, in the same way that our listFiles example uses one.  Then, as a second step, get rid of the "for" loop -- using the same techniques in that hinty video posted earlier, and in the same way you already got rid of "for" loops in the nthHappyNumber problem.

Maybe don't solve it
You should definitely give this the ol' college effort, but at some point you have to declare that enough is enough, and if you don't have it solved, so be it.  Just be sure to attend the solution session in that case to see how it can be solved.  But you do not have to pour 20 hours of your time into solving this problem.  In fact, that would clearly be a bad idea.
 
Good luck!
 
David

H Fractal size hint
Hi all.  Based on numerous questions we have seen, please note this addendum to the H Fractal problem:  "Hint: The H that is drawn right in the middle should always have the same size (the width and height should be half the window width and height). At each level, we draw new H's with half the dimensions of the previous level. This is why the window size never has to change (since 1 + 1/2 + 1/4 + 1/8 + ... = 2)."
 
However...  If you are done with H Fractal, and your solution is at least reasonably close to this, you are fine.  But what is not ok is if you make the window progressively larger with deeper fractals.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

hw9 due time, hw9 no late submissions, next week's optional lecture
Hi all.  A few more announcements:
 
hw9 is due at 8pm (somehow that was not in the official release)

hw9 is still due Wednesday  :-)

No late submissions will be accepted for hw9.  So Wed 8pm is the latest you can submit it (unless you have a pre-arranged extension due to a university-approved conflict).

Next week's optional/advanced lecture will be Tuesday at 8pm.  In it, Rohan will cover webapps.  Really cool stuff.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David


Read these hints! Really! (Especially @4358 hint #1)
@4358 hint #1 talks about optional parameters and wrapper functions.
 
Most of the questions on piazza since that time have been answered with this:  "See @4358 hint #1".
 
So, to pre-empt the next 100+ questions about it:  Please see @4358 hint #1.  Watch the video even.  It will probably help.

Good luck with it.

David

hw9 group formation change: go to OH!
Hi all.  Change in hw9 group formation plan:  if you are not in a group, go to OH asap and the CA"s there will help you get in one.
 
The problem is that I'll be offline more than usual today, and you really should get started asap with hw9c if you haven't done so already!

So: head over to OH and get into a hw9c group now!

Good luck with it!

David

hw9 final release and some hints
Hi all.  Hw9 is now fully released.  The only new problem is one additional bonus problem.  Here are the changes you should be aware of:
 
Hint: Read/view linearSearch+largest examples now in course notes
At the top of the recursion notes, you'll see a link to a code example and two videos that walk through the code examples.  These show how to use an index to walk through a list recursively.  This is highly recommended viewing, as it may help with some of hw9.  Here is the newly-added content from those notes:
Also study these examples (linearSearch and largest): code, video1, video2

bonusPythagorasTree is in fact bonus
Some people were asking about this.  Yes, this problem is indeed optional/bonus.

No duplicate course numbers
Small edit/clarification to getCourse problem:  "Finally, you may assume that a course name may not occur more than once in a course catalog."

Magic #'s in solveABC
We will be lenient in grading for magic numbers in solveABC, in particular regarding indexes into constraints or into the board.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Please make your posts private (and is anyone looking for a hw9 partner?)
Hi all.  Two things:
 
1)  Please make your posts private.  Please do not make course-wide posts.  Even for good reasons, such as looking for a hw9 partner.  Instead, email Prof Ada, Jordan, or me, and we'll make the course-wide post as appropriate.  Thanks.
 
And...
 
2) If you are still looking for a hw9 partner, please email me.  I'll pair them up as I receive these requests.
 
Thanks.
 
David

hw9 mostly posted
Hi all.  Most of hw9 is now out there.  We'll likely add another bonus, and perhaps one more problem tomorrow.  But this should keep you plenty busy for tonight, for those looking to get a big jump on the hw tonight.
 
Also: even though hw9 is due Wednesday, we very highly suggest that you pretend it is due Sunday night.  Use your weekend wisely.  As hw8 proved, it's really tough doing these hw's during the week, when the rest of your action-packed CMU lives are so, well, action-packed.
 
Enjoy, and...  Carpe diem.

David

stackoverflow cheating (required reading)
Hi all.  Sadly, we have links to stackoverflow questions that were obviously posed by a 15-112 student (seeing as they quote our hw problems), along with explicit (if awful) solutions provided by random non-CMU persons out there.
 
This is cheating.
 
Whoever did this (and we already have a fair idea who it was) has until tonight to come forward and admit this, or they will fail the course and face further penalties at the university level, perhaps including suspension from CMU.
 
Admitting to this offense tonight may result in a reduced penalty, and in any case we would advocate that the consequences remain within this course (though really that's up to the Dean of Student Affairs).
 
Please email me now if you did this, and we will meet soon to discuss the consequences.
 
David

hw9 due Wednesday!
Hi all.  We've heard from a bunch of you about some midterms for other courses on Tuesday.  While we can't always accommodate such requests (sorry), this time it seems we can.
 
So: hw9 is due Wednesday.  We're still sorting out just when it will be due, but it will be no earlier than 6pm, and in any case no later than 8pm (so you can then go to the optional solution session and quiz prep session).
 
And of course we'll post more of the actual hw soon.  :-)
 
Just wanted this out there for your planning purposes.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Peer-Tutor Signups Redux (optional form due today)
Hi all.  We have a few more students looking for peer tutors, so...  We'll re-open the Peer-Tutor signup form, both for students seeking tutoring and for students offering tutoring.
 
If you are already doing peer tutoring and you are happy with it, do not sign up here, just keep doing the good things are you already doing!
 
But if you are not in peer tutoring, and wish to join, please fill out this form today.
Carpe diem.
 
David

quiz7 and quiz7-retake
Hi all.  First, thanks, as always, to our CA's for their great same-day turnaround on grading quiz7's!  And...
 
Despite the apparent lack of confidence in the air at the time, quiz7 actually went reasonably well!  The raw median was 67, and we added +5 to get an adjusted median of 72 (top adjusted score was 104, with 11 scores of 100+).  As usual, your adjusted scores are now in autolab.  These results may not be awesomely fabulous, sure, but they are not so bad, either.  They show some good learning, with room for growth.
 
We talked about a possible retake, and we'll do it.  This coming Tuesday, at the start of class, we will take a quiz7-retake in a shortened and easier-to-grade format.  Your grade on quiz7 will be entered as the max of your grade on either yesterday's quiz or Tuesday's quiz (so, yes, you may skip the retake and just keep your current quiz7 grade if you wish).
 
We hope that this promotes some solid OOPy studying between now and Tuesday.  Now is the time to shore up your understanding of OOP!
 
Carpe oopem.
 
David

Recursion notes updates: new nqueens posted, study sorting!
Hi all.  The new nqueens.py we covered in lecture is available in the recursion notes (see link at the top).  You should study that version, not the one at the bottom.  And between lecture and today's recitation, we covered all the other required material, except for the recursive sorts.  You are responsible for recursive selectionsort, insertionsort, and mergesort, but not quicksort or radixsort, so be sure to study these before the recursion quiz!  Note also that they are not destructive sorts, but rather return new sorted lists (so they are more like sorted(a) than like a.sort()).
 
Enjoy!

David

APT Tech Talk (Tue, 4:30pm, Rashid)
Hi all.  This is not a 112 event and can be safely ignored as you wish.  That said, APT does sponsor our 15-112 term project presentation event, and numerous former 112 staff and students have gone on to work at APT.  Plus, there's free food!  So there's reason to believe some of you may benefit by attending this event (and while some of it may be pitched at a higher level than 112, I have been assured that most of it should be accessible to 112 students).

hw9 deadline is Monday
It will be posted in the morning.
 
Meanwhile, enjoy this lovely Thursday night!
 
David

Snake, again!
Hi all.  Just another reminder that you should study how Snake works.  It just might slither its way onto today's quiz...
 
David

Snake!
Hi all.  Regarding @3777:  It appears some of you may need to study up on Snake tonight.  It may be on the quiz tomorrow.  Or not.  But it is a case study, and we would expect you to understand it in detail, just like wordSearch, or lockerProblem, or any other case study.
 
We would not expect you to memorize every last detail of the code (that's silly).  But we would definitely expect you to understand the basic design.  You can look at previous semester's quizzes to get an idea of the sorts of questions we could ask about it, if indeed it is on the quiz at all (there's more to quiz than time for it, so we only quiz a subset of the previous week's material on most quizzes).
 
Good luck tomorrow.
 
David

Universal FarmGame answer (In FarmGame, can we _______________?)
Hi all.  We are getting lots and lots of questions like this:
 
Q: In FarmGame, can we _______________?

A: Yes -- so long as you meet the very few requirements in the spec.
 
This is open-ended, requiring you to make some design decisions.  So make them!  And don't feel like you have to post to piazza to confirm your decisions.  We won't do that.  We'll just say:  "You can do whatever you want, so long as you meet the very few requirements in the spec."
 
Good luck with it!
 
David

hw9 pre-release: an edit (if -> while) and a hint (look for 1 or 4)
Hi all.  I should have had one more editing pass on that post (sorry...).  It needs an edit, and I'll also throw in a hint for good measure.
 
The Edit:  "if" is fine, of course.  "while" is not. The autograder will reject "while", "for", and "itertools".  You know, loops ("iteration").
 
The Hint: every test to see if any given number is happy will eventually get to either 1 or 4.
 
Cheers.
 
David

hw9 pre-release
Hi all.  Here it is, the penultimate pre-release!
 
As with hw8, hw9 will have a SOLO part (hw9s) and a COLLABORATIVE part (hw9c).
 
It is essential that the solo part be 100% solo.  Sadly, on hw8s, some students again violated these terms and will face serious consequences.  Let's please not have that happen with hw9s.
 
That said, everyone should work collaboratively on hw9c.  It is not required, but it is very strongly encouraged.  To promote this, we will help arrange groups at office hours tonight, at lecture tomorrow, at office hours tomorrow, and also at recitation Friday (though you should ideally be in a group before then).  Groups can have up to 2 total students in them (you and one other current 15-112 student).
 
With that said, here's your pre-release:
 
hw9s (SOLO): solveABC
Do solveABC from here (see #6), using backtracking (as covered in the notes, and as we'll discuss tomorrow in lecture, and again in tomorrow night's optional session and also in recitation).  Note that if you want to get started tonight and you don't yet know backtracking, you would still benefit by writing just the code that checks whether a given board is in fact a legal solution to solveABC.  Then you can add backtracking later.
 
hw9c (COLLABORATIVE): recursive nthHappyPrime (and helper functions)
Do nthHappyPrime from here (see #2), along with the other helper functions specified in the writeup, but only with recursion and without using any iteration (the autograder will automatically reject any file that has an "if", "for", or "itertools" in it!)
 
More tomorrow in the full release.
 
Have fun!
 
David

Finish FarmGame tonight!
Hi all.  The hw9 pre-release will be later today, but...  It appears that many of you have not yet finished FarmGame.   Yikes.  It was part of hw8, and a full-fledged hw9 is coming out.  So...  Finish FarmGame.  Tonight!  Now!
 
Also, remember that FarmGame is not supposed to be some amazing app.  Keep it simple.  Just show us that you understand how to create and use some simple classes.  Keep the graphics and gameplay really simple.
 
Good luck and have fun!!!
 
David

Optional/Advanced Lecture today on 1-Player and 2-Player AI
Hi all.  Lukas and Aaron will be leading today's optional/advanced lecture on 1-Player and 2-Player AI.  In particular:
 
For 1-player AI, they'll cover solving complete-information solitaire games and puzzles, like the 8 puzzle (or the 15 puzzle), or Peg Solitaire, etc.  The main algorithm here will be A*.
 
For 2-player AI, they'll cover playing complete-information games without hidden state or chance, like chess, checkers, othello, etc.  The main algorithm here will be Minimax.
 
Fun stuff!
 
Enjoy!
 
David


hw8 late deduction only 10, not 20
Hi all.  Some of you noticed that there seemed to be a 20-point late deduction, since autolab was deducting 10 for each of hw8s and also hw8c.  That's not right, it's just 10 points overall.  This was fixed by changing hw8c to 0.  That's not a change in policy, it's just a way to get autolab to do what we want.
 
Anyhow, things are ok now, and it's just a single 10-point deduction.
 
Sorry for any confusion.

David

Hw late-day deduction policy: 25 --> 10
Hi all.  Every hw this semester, we have reduced the late deduction from the historical value of 25 points down to just 10 points.  The worry in so doing was that many students would simply treat the late date as the deadline and routinely absorb the 10 point deduction, which of course is in nobody's best interests.  Fortunately, this is not what we have observed this semester (with a few notable exceptions).
 
And so:  this is now the official policy, for what remains of this semester, and presumably for the foreseeable future.

The late-day deduction is 10 points.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Please fill out the Optional CA Review Form!!! (due today!!!!)
Hi all.  Here again is the form:  CA Review Form.
 
Please fill out this form!  Once per each CA that you feel you can meaningfully review.
 
It will only take a minute.  And it will help make this a better course for you, for your classmates, and for future 15-112 students!
 
We have 147 reviews so far.  And thanks for that!!!!  But we have 40 CA's, and that's not so many reviews per CA (some have only one review at this point, which is not enough data to make any real conclusions).  And we have way more than 147 students, so there are plenty of you who have not reviewed a CA yet.

This is optional, but it is really important to help us adjust our game and give you the best possible experience.  We very much value your input, and we carefully read all of it and we definitely do change things based on your excellent suggestions.
 
I can assure you that the CA's are eagerly awaiting to hear how they are doing.
 
So...  Please fill out this CA Review Form, once for each CA you would like to review.
 
Also: if you wish to be sure, check out the CA pictures online here:
    http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112/staff-photos/staff-photos.html
 
 
Thanks again!  And...  Carpe diem!
 
David

Flashing in Tkinter (especially on Windows with fast updates)
Hi all.  Some of you are reporting that your Tetris game is flashing in weird ways at times.  This is especially true for students using Windows machines, and also when there are very fast updates.
 
This is just an artifact that you can safely ignore.
 
It is a result of the fairly gross things that had to be done to allow us to use Tkinter in a non-event-based way.  Basically, the canvas you draw to is not real.  It is fake.  It just remembers what you want to draw, and then at some not-too-distant time, tells the real canvas to do the drawing.  If the timing here gets messed up, things flash.
 
This all goes away next week, when we use real event-based programming.
 
For now, just keep your timerFired delays above, say, 250 milliseconds, and try not to hit keystrokes faster than, say, 5 per second.
 
Or, for what it's worth, just don't worry about it.  It's fine.  It's an artifact.  And it will go away next week.  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David

Optional Microsoft Kinect via C# Loan Request Form
Hi again.  Please fill out this form if you wish to borrow a Microsoft Kinect and try to use it via C#. Note that we will be exploring how to use Kinects via Python, and hope to find a good answer soon. So many of you may wish to hold off until then. And you'll still have equal access to the Kinects at that time. This form is just for those who feel confident that they can explore using the Kinects via C# and wish to get a jump on this now. The form is due by 11:59pm today (Mon 27-Oct).
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Optional CA Review Forms (due tomorrow)
Hi all.  To help us give you the best experience possible, we often seek your feedback throughout the semester in a variety of forums.  You will get a chance to provide feedback on the course and the professors at the end-of-semester FCE's, and you can be sure we will read those carefully and take your feedback to heart.
 
Now, however, we seek your thoughtful feedback about our CA's.
 
To that end, we ask that you fill out this CA Review Form.  While we very much value your feedback, this is entirely optional. Please fill out one form for each CA you wish to review. Also, please do state your mind, but please keep your comments constructive.
 
Also: if you wish to be sure, check out the CA pictures online here:
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112/staff-photos/staff-photos.html
 
We take your feedback seriously, and we will definitely read all of it and take it all to heart. Thanks for your input!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw8s autograder error messages
Hi all.  The hw8s autograder really just does the same tests as were provided in the hw8 writeup, but with different numbers.  This is good to know, since the error messages are basically not helpful this week, beyond telling you which test failed.  After that, you'll have to do your own debugging.   If you fail a given test in the autograder that you passed on the numbers in the writeup, then perhaps change the numbers a bit and see if you can't perhaps find that point of failure.

Anyhow, this is probably useful information for those who do not score 30/30 on hw8s.
 
Good luck with it!

David

Discriminant and determinant revisited (please read)
Hi all.  Sorry for the confusion here....
 
I did not change the problem spec (it was too late for that), so the problem still is calling for the determinant.  So you should still have a method called determinant, not discriminant.
 
My earlier post was just to acknowledge the error, since some students were trying to track down what the determinant of a quadratic polynomial was (ugh).
 
Since I invented this confusion, you are not responsible for any lost submissions for this.  So...  I'll just double the submissions on hw8s to 10 instead of 5.
 
Anyhow, I do hope this clears this up once and for all.
 
And I hope you are wrapping up hw8.  The early submissions to the autograder are promising...
 
Sorry again, and carpe diem.
 
David 

hw8s autograder live, and hw8c (Tetris) also can be submitted now
Hi all.  Please be sure to submit the different parts of hw8 to the correct places in Autolab.
 
Submit Polynomial/Quadratic, along with BetterTetris bonus, to hw8s.  The "s" is for solo.  That also includes the autograder for the Polynomial/Quadratic problem.
 
Submit Tetris to hw8c.  The "c" is for collaborative.  Small point:  hw8c is listed under the "etc" category, not under the "hw" category.  This is for Autolab's benefit, and you can ignore this fact.  Just be sure to submit Tetris to hw8c, not hw8s.  Thanks.
 
Good luck!
 
David

vocab edit: determinant --> discriminant
:-)
 
It's just the b**2 - 4*a*c value, that's all.

David

hw8 CA meetings added to writeup
Hi all.  An eagle-eyed student correctly pointed out that this was missing from the official writeup (thanks!).  Now it's there.  Please note:
 
1) What to submit?
For this problem, there is nothing to submit, as the CA's will record these meeting times and enter your grades accordingly.
 
2) Points
This was worth 5 (basically free) points.  To make things still add to 100, FarmGame will be worth 25 points.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Testing Tetris
Hi all.  There seem to be a lot of questions about this.  You do not have to test your view or your controllers.  That is, you do not test redrawAll or any of its helper methods, and you do not have to directly test onMousePressed, onKeyPressed, onTimerFired, initAnimation, or (though not an MVC thing) __init__.
 
So what do you have to test?  Well, the things you could test easily.  For example, fallingPieceIsLegal.  That only needs to use self.board and self.fallingPiece, so it's easy to set those up and test that function.  See?
 
That said, we expect most testing of Tetris to be visual, and we will grade the automated testing of Tetris liberally.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Q: How similar can our code be if we collaborate?
Q: How similar can our code be if we collaborate?
 
A: Good question (that several students have recently asked).  So, we very much want you to collaborate.  The right way, working closely together, both of you deeply involved in every step along the way.  And if you do that, then yes, we would expect that both your solutions would be remarkably similar.
 
Q: So can the auto-plagiarism detector tell the difference between copied code and code that is really similar due to legal and encouraged collaboration?
 
A: Sometimes yes, sometimes no.  But don?t worry about this.  If you follow the rules, you are fine, period.  Not a problem.  We expect partners to have similar code.   This is not an issue.
 
Have fun!
 
David

You can start with the Polynomial starter code!
Hi all.  Some are asking if you can actually use that starter code.  You can!
 
The writeup says:  You may copy-paste this code from the course website to get started, but if you do that, be certain first to throughly study and understand the code!
 
Cheers.
 
David

hw8 released!
Hi all.  Hw8 is now fully released.  There is nothing additional due Monday beyond what has already been released:  Tetris (collaborative) and Polyonmial/Quadratic (solo).  There is a third problem, FarmGame, but it is due later.  And there is pretty fun bonus, also due Monday, but it's optional, as all bonus is (of course).
 
As for FarmGame, the writeup says this:  Note: while this problem is part of hw8, it will be submitted along with hw9. So this problem, and only this problem, is due when the rest of hw9 is due. This is because it was released a bit late in the hw cycle. Even so, quiz8 will cover the ideas in this problem. So you should try to finish it by the hw8 deadline. But if you need more time, you can have it, all the way to the hw9 deadline.   So, remember: do not submit this with hw8. Submit this with hw9. 
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

repr hint is not very hinty
Hi all.  So the repr hint was somewhat less than helfpul, seeing as it was, well, wrong.  Sorry about that.
 
In Polynomial, your __repr__ method has to return a string in a format such that you can call eval on that string to get back a new Polynomial that is == to the original Polynomial.
 
Basically, it should return something that looks like, say, "Polynomial(1,2,3)", though there are other answers that would work and not look quite like this.
 
Sorry for the confusion.
 
David

Polynomial and Quadratic hints
Hi all.  Here are some hints for Polynomial and Quadratic:
 
Starter code (Polynomial.py)
It refers to some starter code, which was covered briefly in lecture last semester.  You can find this in last semester's lecture notes here.  Study the code.  See how it stores the coefficients of a Polynomial in self.coeff, so if coeffs == [2,-3,5], then the Polynomial being represented is 2x**2-3*x+5.

Required methods
Including the methods we already provided for you above, here are the methods you'll probably want to include in your solution (though of course you may include more helper methods if you wish):
class Polynomial(object):
    def __init__(self, *coeffs):
    def firstNonZeroCoeff(self, coeffs):
    def degree(self):
    def coeff(self, power):
    def evalAt(self, x):
    def __add__(self, other):    
    def __mul__(self, other):
    def __rmul__(self, other):
    def __pow__(self, power):
    def derivative(self):
    def __str__(self):
    def __repr__(self):
    def __eq__(self, other):
    def __hash__(self):

class Quadratic(Polynomial):
    def __init__(self, *coeffs):
    def determinant(self):
    def numberOfRealRoots(self):
    def getRealRoots(self):
repr and hash methods
You do not have to write repr or hash this week, so here are some (overly) simplistic yet functional repr and hash methods for you (just copy-paste these into your code):
    def __repr__(self):
        # this is quick and dirty, but works
        return "'" + str(self) + "'"

    def __hash__(self):
        # this is quick and dirty, but works
        return hash(str(self))
Variable-length parameters (*args)
To create the constructor for Polynomial, you will have to use *args.  We did not cover this in lecture (life in intermediate courses...).  When you use *args, Python places all the remaining arguments into a tuple and sets the parameter "args" to reference that tuple.  Consider this:
    def f(*args):
       print "in f, args =", args Then:
    f(5) prints:  in f, args =
announcementnts for the midterms.  Never.  Well, until now....
 
Here are some actual, real hints:
 
1) You should know s.split and s.splitlines.  Wow, so explicit!

2) You will write an animation free response using our MVC framework.  You will not write the main function, but you will need to know how to write the rest (the controllers, the view, and the init).
 
3) The test will not be as time-pressured as the quizzes, but you may have some time pressure.  So don't dally.  Move quickly, and move to where you can score the most points.  For example, the last 4 problems are free response, worth over half the total points, and where you can score liberal partial credit.  Hint, hint...
 
4) Study.  Focus on the big ideas.  Expressions, functions, loops, conditionals, strings, 1d and 2d lists, etc.  Focus on quizzes and hw's and the notes.  Don't obsess over every little detail.
 
5) Sleep.  Really.
 
6) Don't stress.  Really.
 
That's it for now.
 
Good luck!
 
David and Anil

Do not use { } notation for sets / 2 extra hw7 submissions...
Hi all.  The autograder uses a slightly older version of Python than we do.  And that's normally just fine.  Except when it isn't.
 
For example:  It cannot use { } notation for sets.
 
You can't do this:  s = { }
 
You have to do this:  s = set()
 
It also cannot handle dictionary comprehensions (don't worry if you don't know what those are).
 
To help with those who lost submissions to this, everyone has 2 extra submissions.
 
Good luck wrapping up hw7.
 
David

Do not debug each other's code
Hi again.  Word is also that a CA directly observed students debugging each other's code.  The CA incorrectly failed to stop them, and also did not take names and andrew id's.  Had they,  and they should have, then these students would have faced serious consequences.
 
Stop this behavior.  Now.
 
Do your own debugging.
 
I am tired of writing letters to the Dean of Student Affairs.  I'll keep writing them if I have to, but really, folks, I do not want to do it.
 
Please follow the rules.  We will enforce them.
 
David

Do not leave your code on whiteboards
Hi all.  Word is that some students have solved their hw problems on whiteboards in GHC, then left their code there and walked away.  Don't do that.  When you are done, erase your code.
 
if someone else sees your code and copies it, you are just as responsible as if you had emailed your code directly to them.
 
David

makeFakeCanvasForTestingPurposes
Hi all.  You know you don't have to test graphics functions, nor controllers.  But you do have to test their helper functions, where you can.  So an astute student asked:  how can we test a helper function that takes a canvas object but then does not draw?
 
Good question!
 
Here's a simple way to do it.  Use the function makeFakeCanvasForTestingPurposes, provided here, that creates a fake canvas object.  You can then set its canvas.data values appropriately and send that into your function to test it.  Check this out:
 
# this is the function we want to test
def thingIsOrange(canvas):
    return (canvas.data.thing == "orange")

# copy-paste this function so you can make a test function
def makeFakeCanvasForTestingPurposes():
    class Struct(): pass
    fakeCanvas = Struct()
    fakeCanvas.data = Struct()
    return fakeCanvas

# And now we can make a test function
def testThingIsOrange():
    print "Testing thingIsOrange()...",
    canvas = makeFakeCanvasForTestingPurposes()
    canvas.data.thing = "green"
    assert(thingIsOrange(canvas) == False)
    canvas.data.thing = "orange"
    assert(thingIsOrange(canvas) == True)
    print "Passed!"

# and here we go...
testThingIsOrange()
 
Hope this helps.
 
David

hw7 autograder is live
Woohoo!  :-)
 
David

Parents Weekend 15-112 Talk (last-minute interest-gauging form) (due by 2pm today!)
Hi all.  Some students have asked if I could perhaps find time to chat with their parents about 112 (what we learn, why we learn it, CS versus coding, etc). Sounds like fun! This form is to see if there is enough interest to organize this a bit. It's all quite last-minute, and may not happen. But we'll see. The timeslots are one hour long, though I doubt we'd run for an hour. Probably half an hour, really (though who knows). Or not at all, depending on how many responses I get. Also, we don't have reserved space, so there's that. We'll see... :-)
 
Again, the form is here.
 
At 2pm, I'll alert the respondents as to what if anything comes of this.
 
Meanwhile, I hope you are enjoying this fabulous fall weekend!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Patch for basicAnimation.py, if you use IDLE (symptom: animations work, but won't close)
Hi all.  Those of you using IDLE have been experiencing a problem where animations with the new basicAnimation.py v0.5 were working fine until they were closed, but then they never exited and just sat there forever.  Ugh.
 
The reasons for this are complicated, but start with this fact:  IDLE is written in Tkinter, and Tkinter is not written to be run twice at once.  Ugh.

Anyhow, I think I have fixed it.  So far, everyone who has tried this has reported success.
 
To get the fix, just redownload basicAnimation.py from the course website or from here.
 
Enjoy!
 
David

playSudoku(initialBoard) without an app or canvas?
Hi all.  This is another frequent question we've seen:
 
Q: How can playSudoku only take an initialBoard, and not an app or canvas?
 
A: Because it is just a one-line function!  You'll write another function which does all the work, and that function will take an app, a canvas, and also the initialBoard.  Your playSudoku function will include a line similar to this (from the course notes):
 
BasicAnimationRunner(myBasicAnimation, width=300, height=300, extraArg="wow!")
 
Of course, you'll change "myBasicAnimation" to be the other function you write, and you'll change "extraArg" to be the initialBoard.
 
Q: So why do it this way?  Why not just have the user make that call to BasicAnimationRunner?
 
A: Good question, but also one with a good answer.  Because the fact that you used BasicAnimationRunner is an implementation detail.  There is no good reason that a user should have to know that you did this.  And you certainly could write playSudoku some other way (though not for hw7), perhaps not even using Tkinter at all!  So the function playSudoku only specifies Polya 1, and hides the details from the caller.  This is generally how high-level functions (such as this) are specified.  You are told what to do, but not how to do it.  And in such cases, when you are done, the caller should not know or care how you did it.  They just say playSudoku and, voila, they get a Sudoku game!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Help Screen
Tonight is the night of hints in dribs and drabs...
 
The help screen is not a different screen or window.  It's the same exact screen, just displaying different information.
 
The only hint we'll give is this:  you might want to set a boolean value in init, something like:
 
    canvas.data.inHelpScreen = False
 
Then you can change this when the user presses 'h' or '?', and then your redrawAll can take this into account and decide whether to draw the help screen or to draw the Sudoku game....
 
David

Undo means arbitrary undo
Hi all.  Several are asking if undo means "undo the last step" or "undo all previous steps".
 
In the 1980's, single-step undo was maybe ok.
 
Not now.
 
Now, undo means arbitrary undo + redo.
 
Of course, it's really easy to implement, with a "doList" and an "undoList", or some such.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

makeTestSudokuBoard helper functions
Hi all.  Several of you have asked how to make test functions fit into the 20-line requirement, what with most of those lines being consumed by just creating Sudoku boards.  Good question.
 
Here's an idea that could help:
 
def makeTestSudokuBoard():
    return [
        [ 5, 3, 0, 0, 7, 0, 0, 0, 0 ],
        [ 6, 0, 0, 1, 9, 5, 0, 0, 0 ],
        [ 0, 9, 8, 0, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0 ],
        [ 8, 0, 0, 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 3 ],
        [ 4, 0, 0, 8, 0, 3, 0, 0, 1 ],
        [ 7, 0, 0, 0, 2, 0, 0, 0, 6 ],
        [ 0, 6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 2, 8, 0 ],
        [ 0, 0, 0, 4, 1, 9, 0, 0, 5 ],
        [ 0, 0, 0, 0, 8, 0, 0, 7, 9 ]
      ]
 
If need be, you could have makeTestSudokuBoard1, makeTestSudokuBoard2, makeTestSudokuBoard3...
 
Hope this helps.
 
David
 
OH queue is *empty* right now!
What a great opportunity!  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Remember: no global variables!
That's all!  :-)
 
David

Parents Weekend extensions
Hi again.  We think it is in everyone's interests to finish hw7 by the Sunday night deadline, so you can set your sights in earnest on preparing for the upcoming midterm (which not only includes practicing and studying 112 material, but also definitely includes being healthy and balanced -- eating right, sleeping right, socializing right, and attending to your other courses and interests, and all that requires time, so use your time wisely!).
 
That said, we understand it is Parents Weekend, and some of you are hoping you might be able to spend more than 3 or 4 minutes with your parents, who may have flown from halfway round the world to be here this weekend.
 
Understandable.
 
So: anyone whose parents are physically here this weekend can ask for and will receive a 1-day extension on hw7.  While we will not require proof that your parents are here, this is not a general extension for everyone, and we expect people to be honest (of course!), as always.
 
Even if you get such an extension, you'd be best-served trying not to use it.  There are many hours in a weekend, and with this shortened hw, you should be able to find time for the hw and also for your parents.  The extension is just a safety net just in case you fall a couple hours short of that goal.
 
Enjoy parents weekend!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

quiz6 results (mostly great, but with a notable caveat...)
Hi all.  Some of you asked why I did not publish details about quiz6 results.  My oversight... 
 
The results were wonderful (mostly).  The median was a very nice 82.5.  Solid work, everyone!  Two students shared the top score of 103, and 16 students scored 100 or higher.  Excellent!
 
That said...  Around 18 who took quiz6 scored below 50 on it.  You may often hear me talk about just-keep-trying and all that, which I quite sincerely believe, but not this time, not for those scoring so low on this quiz.  See, you were told repeatedly to know the sorting algorithms and be able to code them effortlessly for this quiz.  And then we did exactly as we said we would, and 50 points were given just for bubblesort.  Which is to say, everyone should have scored 50 points basically for free.  Given that, those of you who scored below 50 points have to seriously rethink your approach.  You may not be able to get every last Reasoning-Over-Code, or solve every last problem you are given.  But you darn well ought to be able to reliably reproduce the most important examples we have used in class (isPrime, fasterIsPrime, nthPrime, lockerProblem, basicAnimationDemo, selectionsort, bubblesort, mergesort, timing sorts, and wordSearch come to mind).  Of course, it would be nice if you also studied the assigned hw problems, too, and could even answer questions that apply and extend those ideas in interesting ways.  Yes.  But these core problems from lecture are, well, core.  You should flat-out know them, rock-solidly, inside out and backwards.  Please be sure to do so by the upcoming midterm.
 
Fortunately, for those of you who scored below 50 on this quiz, you may still have time to right this situation, if not much.  But you need to hold yourself to a higher bar.  It's not enough to "get" the problems.  You need to be able to write them, yourself, alone, from scratch, and quickly.  And there's only one way to get there:  practice, practice, practice.
 
Carpe diem.

David

The basic rules of MVC
Hi again.  When writing playSudoku, remember these basic rules of MVC:
 
* Controllers only modify the model + Controllers never draw!
So, mousePressed, keyPressed, and timerFired (and any helper functions they call) never draw anything on the canvas.  They only modify canvas.data.  That's it.  The drawing is done by redrawAll, later on.  No exceptions!
 
* Views only draw + Views never modify the model!
So redrawAll (and any helper functions it calls) only draw, and never change anything in canvas.data.  Again, no exceptions!
 
The CA's will enforce these rules when grading!
 
And the rules exist very much for your benefit.  They are not 15-112 rules.  They are The Way to do this (well, to be precise, they are a slightly simplified version of MVC, but still, very much in the spirit of MVC!).  This approach will allow you to write more complex animations more quickly and more reliably.  It works, at least a whole lot better than the monolithic spaghetti code (yes, that's a technical term!) you've had to write before learning this way.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

basicAnimation.py version 0.5 (you need to download this!)
Hi all.  To complete hw7, you need to use the just-released version 0.5 of basicAnimation.py, available here.
 
Again, you need to download this version and not an older version if you want to be able to properly finish hw7.
 
This now supports passing arguments -- for example, to pass the initialBoard from your playSudoku function to your actual Sudoku app function, as hw7 requires you to do!  Look at the example code in basicAnimationDemo2 also on that same page to see how it works.  You can rename "extraArg" to whatever you want.  Say, "initialBoard".  And you can have more than one extra arg.  Or no extra args.
 
This update also fixed a few other issues:
 
# Change log:
# 0.5: added optional keyword arguments passed through to appFn
# 0.5: fixed crash ("fn not defined") on reporting exception in canvas getattr
# 0.5: eliminated error on exit (just quit on WM_DESTROY_WINDOW, then destroy in canvas.after)
# 0.5: new, improved timerFired design (with separate timerFired thread)
 
Enjoy!  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Passing the initialBoard to the sudoku app
Hi all.  Small whoops here:  as of now, there's no easy way to pass the initialBoard from your playSudoku function to the actual Sudoku app.  Ugh.
 
There are ways around this using globals (awful) or closures (too complicated, and we've not covered them yet, and you should not yet use them).   The real way around this is for me to patch basicAnimation to allow you to provide parameters that pass through to the app.  I'll do this, in the morning, and post back here with the update and how to use it.
 
For tonight, no problem:  just hardcode the board in the Sudoku app.  So this should not slow you down at all for working on this tonight.
 
But that's just for tonight.  For hw7, you'll have to use the updated version I post in the morning.
 
Sorry for the confusion.
 
David

hw7 posted (and a couple important notes)
Hi all.  Hw7 is now fully posted.  It's the same as the pre-release only with a few more details for the playSudoku function.
 
Some important notes:
 
To use the new MVC framework (as you must!), you'll have to use the most recent version 0.4 of basicAnimation.py, which is available for download from here.  Do not use previous versions!

Despite what I may have said offhand in lecture today, you do need to use timerFired here, though only in a limited way (just for the timer).  Even so, be sure to attend recitation tomorrow where (among other things) you will review using timerFired.

Now that we're using MVC, the 25-line limit applies to animations as well as other graphics.

Have fun!!!
 
Carpe diem!

David

Why 42?
Hi all.  Some have recently asked why the number 42 is so prevalent in the course notes?
 
Well, we need some value to mean "this value is just a placeholder, and has no meaning besides that".  Values like -1, 0, 1 and so on are bad values for this, because they often DO have meaning.  So it has to be a value that would basically never come up otherwise.  42 fits that bill.
 
Plus, there's this:  42 is the answer to the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe, and Everything, as noted here.
 
If you have not read them, I highly recommend the books from The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy (say, here).  It is great comedic sci-fi, though it has a dry and even snarky sense of humor that you'll probably either find side-splittingly funny, or not.  Your mileage may vary.
 
Enjoy!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Code from optional lecture (Krypto, Cryptarithms)
Hi all.  Here is the code we rewrote last night to solve Krypto and Cryptarithms.  It includes some other fun stuff, too.
 
Fun times.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw7 pre-release
Hi all.  Here is the hw7 pre-release:
 
1) Do isLegalSudoku from here.
 
2) Do friendsOfFriends from here.
 
What else will be in the full release?
 
3) Write a Sudoku game (using #1 from above, of course, and our basicAnimation framework).  Writeup pending.
 
4) Bonus: 2048
Using our basicAnimation framework, write the function play2048(), that plays a fairly close knock-off of this game:  http://2048game.com/
For full credit, include the animations.
Maybe more bonus, too, but no more required problems than those listed above.
Enjoy!

David

Tonight's Optional Lecture (Krypto/24, Cryptarithms, Hashtables, maybe VM + Assembler)
Hi all.  We're on for tonight, 6-8pm, as usual.
 
Topics include some subset of:
 
 * Hashtables (why sets + dictionary operations are O(1))
 
 * Combinatorial iterators (how to solve krypto (basically, 24) and cryptarithm problems)
 
 * VM + Assembler (time permitting, 'course!)
 
Or something else!  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David

Interesting talk: What?s a Bitcoin? ? A Non-Technical Introduction
Hi all.  The following is not a 112 event but may be of interest to some of you

Hw6 style grades: Code Reviews!
Hi all.  This week, you will not receive a typical style grade on hw6.  Instead, each of you will have an individual 10-minute meeting with one of your CA's, during which time you will review your code in detail (well, as detailed as possible, given it's just 10 minutes).  In this time, you'll likely discuss style, top-down design, and any other concerns you might have along those lines.  This is not the right time for technical help (what does a mod operator do?  how do you solve question 2 on hw6? et cetera).  Focus on style.
 
You'll be getting an email from your CA soon (tonight or tomorrow) to set up these meetings.  All meetings must be concluded by Friday at 8pm.
 
These meetings are not optional, but hey, they are only 10 minutes, so should not really be a hardship.  And they are a GREAT way to learn to code better.  After all: in industry (think Google, Apple, Facebook, etc), this is THE main way that software developers improve their coding skills.  It works for them, and it will work for you.  Code reviews rock.

Getting back to the required part: failure to make an appointment or to show up at an appointment will result in a double max deduction, or -20.
 
Also, please do not be late.  Meetings must end at their assigned times, regardless of when you arrive.  Arriving late will be docked 1 pt per minute, plus you'll probably just get a lower score in addition because your CA will have less time to view your code.  And -- most important -- you'll just learn less.  So please be on time!
 
In fact, show up a few minutes early.  With your laptop open, and your hw6.py file in an editor, good-to-go.
 
These should be fun, and helpful, and productive, and fun.  And helpful!
 
So...  Enjoy!
 
And...  Carpe diem.
 
David

Optional peer-tutor signups (for tutors and for students seeking tutoring) (due tonight)
Hi all.  This is entirely optional, to help us as a community further prepare for the upcoming midterm.
 
Q: Have you been doing very well so far, say scoring 90 or higher on basically every hw and quiz?  And if so, do you have interest in perhaps providing a few hours of tutoring to another 15-112 student sometime over the next week or so?  Great!
 
.... Or ....
 
Q: Alternatively, have you been struggling to learn the material, despite you also consuming the many resources we provide for you?  And if so, do you have interest in perhaps consuming a few hours of tutoring provided by a peer student who said "yes" to the previous questions?
 
Well...  If either of these are true for you, then please sign up for this optional peer-tutoring.
 
Click here for the form.  The form is due by tonight.
 
This is an optional form for students interested either in providing or consuming peer-tutoring. We envision this being 1-to-3 hours per week over the next week or two, though this is up to each student/peer pairing to decide for themselves. There is no credit for participating in this, and no requirement to do so, either.

This is also experimental.  We will proceed only if we get enough sign-ups.

In any case:  together we are stronger than apart. And I truly believe that we are one very strong community of learners!
 
Carpe diem!

David

Hw6 struggles and AMG...
Hi again.  While most of you did quite well on hw6, a sizable number of you instead faced some serious struggles with it.  This is expected, and you can still do just fine in this course despite that, provided that you respond appropriately.  Which may involve doing more work today, perhaps a fair bit of it.
 
Because:  now that we are squarely in the AMG part of the course, you really need to get as close to a 70 or higher on each hw if at all possible.
 
The main place to achieve the most points the fastest on hw6 is in the bubblesort animation.  So you should be sure that you have that working well, if at all possible.  If it is not working yet, then you probably should fix it and submit by tonight's 11pm late deadline.  It's probably best for anyone hoping to qualify for AMG that they do this.
 
Technically, this is not required, and technically hw6 can be one of the hw's that does not get counted towards your AMG.  But we only have 4 hw's remaining after this week, so we are running out of weeks when you can do that.
 
Also, you do not need a 70 average on your hw to qualify for AMG.  You just need a 70 average across everything that is included in the AMG grade computation.  So you might make it with a 60 or so on the hw.  Maybe.  Maybe not.  To do that, you'd have to basically get B's or higher on your term project and your final.  Possible, but the easier and more reliable path is clearly to do better on your hw's.
 
Anyhow, if you have not completed the last problem on hw6, you should probably consider doing that today.
 
Good luck with it.
 
And..  Carpe diem.
 
David


hw6 grades and regrades
Hi all.  Hw6 was yet another fabulous showing on your part, with another perfect 40/40 autograded median (227 perfect 40's!).  Huzzah!
 
I also ran the regrades (yeah, I'll still do it again after tonight's late deadline), as noted in @3020, and...  Fully 10 students were affected, with an increase of between 1.2 and 2.5 points in their grades.  So it was a small effect, but still, everyone should get every point they worked so hard to earn!   You bet!
 
So you know:  some of you have somewhat incorrect solutions that still just barely slip by the autograder, since the autograder is somewhat liberal.  So even if you were "correct", you may still benefit from attending the solution sessions and seeing what an actually-correct solution looks like!
 
In any case, the hw6 submissions on the whole showed tremendous effort, and ongoing tremendous collective progress.  Kudos!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

1 hr extension, 8 extra submissions, and more (please read)
Hi all.  We are experiencing some weird difficulties with autolab which you should know about.
 
It seems that the timing information available to the autograder is varying depending on the load on the autolab servers.  Ugh!
 
In a few, though not many, cases, this is causing code to not pass due to timing issues when it should have passed.  Double ugh!
 
Importantly:  this is not happening in most cases, and generally only involves a few points here and there.  That is:  even with this, nearly all the timing issues reported by the autograder are real, and are due to real problems in the submitted code.
 
Even so, we'll make these few changes to help:
 
1) 1 hr extension
The hw is now due at 11pm tonight for everyone.  Note that the CA's are pushing super hard already, and we are way, way over budget for their time.  So we probably can only have a super-light staff, or maybe no staff, from 10pm to 11pm.
 
2) 8 more submissions
This is the real key.  You have 8 extra submissions to use, so you can check the timing funkiness a couple extra times, if need be.
 
3) Off-peak extra submissions by us
This is the second real key.  After the late deadline, on Wednesday morning in the wee hours, when there is no load on the autolab servers, we will re-run the autograder on everyone's submissions, and we will award each of you the max grade from any autograder run on your code.
 
This should lead to the most fair outcomes.
 
Good luck with the hw.
 
David
 
Remember: keep the stress down, finish what you can, you'll be fine
Hi all.  With the hw due in 5 hours, about 1/3rd of you are done now.  So many are not.  And the OH queue is, well, predictably substantial...
 
So: don't stress.  Just do what you can.  This stuff is hard.  You might not finish a problem or two.  That's ok.  Just give it your best effort.
 
That said: try to do something for the bubblesort simulation if possible, as that is worth a lot of points, and it's manually graded, so easier to earn partial credit....
 
In any case, once you have put in your hard work, and tried your best given what time you can invest in this course, then so be it.
 
Be sure to attend the solution session in any case.  Even if you got 100% on the hw.  It's likely you'll see some good ideas on how to solve these sorts of problems.
 
In any case:  please do not get overly stressed.  You are trying hard, and that's great, and you are learning a lot, and that's great, too.  You may not get 100, but you just don't have to.  You have to try hard and learn a lot. And that you ARE doing.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

n**0.5 is not an int, "in" is not constant-time
Hi all.  Two more hints based on very common confusions we are seeing:
 
1) n**0.5 is not an int
 
4**0.5 is 2.0, not 2.  And they may look the same, but they are not.  You cannot reliably use "==" with floats.  So do something to convert them to ints.  Just casting to an int with int(n**0.5) is a bad idea.  What if we got 1.9999999?  Then the int would convert this to 1, not 2.  So round, then cast.
 
2) "in" is not constant-time
 
If a list has n elements in it, what is the worst-case number of steps required to check if (val in a) is True?  Right.  So "in" is not constant.  It's O(n).
 
So if you use "in" inside two nested loops, where just the loops are O(n**2), then you probably have an O(n**3) solution...
 
Of course, @2971 implicitly suggests another way...
 
David

Infinite loops in binary search (and how to avoid them)
Hi all.  We're seeing lots of this.  Students are using binary search to help solve one of the problems (which seems like a good idea!), and then their code is too slow (bummer).  It's not just too slow, it has an infinite loop (real bummer).
 
First, if you use binary search, be sure to place it in its own function.

Second, be sure to test that function!
 
Third, consider:  say we have a list with n elements in it.  So our first guess is at index n/2.  Say that guess is too low.  So we know the result is between index n/2 and index n (or not there at all).  Well...  To be more precise, we know that the result cannot be at index n/2 (right?), so being more precise, we only have to check between (n/2+1) and n.  Right?
 
It's really important that you understand this or you will most likely have an infinite loop in your binary search.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Dancing sorts
Hey all.  As noted by a sharp-eyed student, for another interesting way to visualize sorts, check out this video of bubbleSort with Hungarian ("Cs?ng?") folk dance.  There are other similar videos by this and other dance troupes for other sorts, too.  A simple YouTube search away...
 
Enjoy!
 
David

hw6: 1 autograder, 8 submissions, 1 bonus!
Hi all.  A few hw6 announcements:
 
* The hw6 autograder is now live!  Use your submissions judiciously!
 
* You may submit hw6 up to 8 times.  The extra few times are because dealing with efficiency issues can be tricky.  Even so, you should use your submissions wisely.  In particular, try to finish every problem before submitting any problem.  And try to fix every bug before resubmitting.
 
* The hw6 bonus problem is also available now.  Enjoy!
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

More on header comments
Hi all.  Upon further consideration, it turns out we have graded this particular style issue inconsistently to this point of the semester.  Whoops.  We will definitely fix this, and asap!  So, two important things:
 
1) We will review all previous style grades and un-deduct any penalties assessed due to missing header comments (so nobody will lose points from this, and some of you will earn some points back).  This may take a week or so, but we'll get it done, most definitely before mid-semester grades are due.
 
And:
 
2) Moving forward, we will be sure to grade consistently for this.  Which is to say, you should include a header comment before every function from now on.  The header comment can be brief, but it has to say what the function does, the type and meaning of the parameters, and the type and meaning of the result.
 
Sorry for any confusion here.  Now we're all on the same page...
 
David

Header comments
Hi again.  Here's an easy way to avoid -2 style points!  The style guide says:  "Use concise, clear, and informative comments ... especially at the start of functions ..."
 
The bold, underlined part is key.  Every function should have a comment before it saying what the function does, the type and purpose of each parameter, and the type and meaning of the return value.  This should be very succinct, but it must be there, for every function you write!
 
Hope this helps.
 
David

Hw6 suggestions and clarifications
Hi all.  This may be helpful reading:
 
in general
 
* In general, you should not use strings to solve purely numeric problems, such as nearestKaprekarNumber.
 
* We are not looking for deep, subtle math truths.  You do not have to look up formulas for special properties of Carol numbers, for example.
 
* We'll not require test functions for functions you used from the notes.  Just be sure to cite they are from the notes.
 
* Don?t forget to be non-destructive in all cases except when explicitly told otherwise (such as, say, when writing a sort function).
 
* For questions requiring a more efficient solution, generally any movement to a better function family should be good enough.  So for containsPythagoreanTriple, for example, since the naive solution is O(n**3), it?s ok to reduce this to O(n**2.5) or O(n**2 logn), even though even better solutions exist.
 
* You may not use sets or dictionaries this week, even though yes, they would certainly help!
 
* You may not use eval() in general, unless explicitly called for.  It?s dangerous and leads to serious security holes.
 
* There is no recursion yet.  In particular, do not use a recursive version of mergesort.
 
* You should know the big-oh of built-in functions you use.  Most are fairly obvious.  For example, max(a) has to look at every element in a, so if there are n elements in a, it is O(n).  Similarly, (val in a) is O(n).  sorted(a) and a.sort() are both O(nlogn).
 
instrumentedSelectionSort(a) and instrumentedBubbleSort(a)
* The writeup requires that you use the exact versions from the course notes.  Do not use xSortLab?s versions, which are similar yet minorly different.  And do not make any modifications to the versions in the course notes, except to count comparisons, swaps, and measure time.
 
* All swaps count, including self-swaps such as swap(a, 0, 0).
 
* Do not use any math or formulas to compute the number of comparisons or swaps.  Instead, just count them as they occur.
 
* For test functions, just use some very small lists where you can manually predict and confirm the results for comparisons and swaps.  And don?t worry about testing the times.

selectionSortVersusBubbleSort()
* You do not need a test function for this function.
 
mergeSortWithOneAuxList(a)
* Your test function here can do little more than confirm that at least the function does sort a list correctly.  The more ambitious among you could also confirm that this remains O(nlogn).
largestSumOfPairs(a)
* This is the easiest question on the hw.  There is a very simple way to do this.  Imagine if you had a page from a book that just contained a whole bunch of numbers, and your task was to find the largest sum of any pair of them.  What would you do?  Would you sort the numbers first?  Really?

hasBalancedParentheses(s)

* Remember: there is a way to solve this in one pass, without creating a new string, by looking at each character only once.  Think about how you might do that yourself, manually, without Python.

containsPythagoreanTriple(a)
 
* Return False if the list does not contain any Pythagorean triples.
 
nthCarolPrime(n) 

* If you can run nthCarolPrime(9) quickly, you're most likely just fine.  Even with a solution fast enough to get past the autograder, your code will still not work quickly for much larger values of n.

nearestKaprekarNumber(n)
* Don?t forget that while Kaprekar numbers must be positive integers, the parameter n is not restricted in this way.  It can be negative, and it can also be any numeric value, including floats.

bubblesortSimulator(app, canvas)
* There is no line limit for the animation again this week (last time!).
 
* There can be subtle variations in different implementations of bubbleSort.  Any reasonable version is fine to use here.

Hope these help!  And good luck with hw6.  And...
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw5 style grades posted
Hi all.  The hw5 style grades are now available (thanks, CA's!!!).
 
Please stop now and go read your style comments.  It's really important that you do that, so you learn from your errors and give yourself a chance to improve.
 
In any case: we made it to our goal of a median of -4 pts for this hw.  Progress!
 
Even so, we have to keep lowering that number, since this still means that half of you are losing about a half-letter-grade due to style errors.  And of course grades are not the real problem here -- the bad style is the real problem, as it will cause you much grief.  Bad style produces buggy code.  Ugh.
 
So let's keep our momentum, and drive down the median style deduction on hw6 all the way to -2.  You can do it!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw5 style grades posted
Hi all.  The hw5 style grades are now available (thanks, CA's!!!).
 
Please stop now and go read your style comments.  It's really important that you do that, so you learn from your errors and give yourself a chance to improve.
 
In any case: we made it to our goal of a median of -4 pts for this hw.  Progress!
 
Even so, we have to keep lowering that number, since this still means that half of you are losing about a half-letter-grade due to style errors.  And of course grades are not the real problem here -- the bad style is the real problem, as it will cause you much grief.  Bad style produces buggy code.  Ugh.
 
So let's keep our momentum, and drive down the median style deduction on hw6 all the way to -2.  You can do it!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Extra OH today (12:30pm - 2pm)
Hi all.  I will have some extra OH today from 12:30pm to 2pm.
 
Hope to see some of you soon!  :-)
 
David

Carpe your own diem
Hi all.  One of my greatest joys in life is watching you leave the cozy confines of CMU and get out there and do something, to improve the human condition, to help someone somewhere somehow.
 
Your hard-won computing prowess may indeed be a pathway to doing just that, whether sometime soon in some charitable way, or sometime down the road in some commercial way (which is still important for humanity, I believe), or by some other path.  Or all of the above.
 
But you do not have to wait to do something, and you do not need any specialized skills to do something.
 
Many of your classmates, and many of you no doubt, are doing something now!
 
And you can, too!
 
Have time during spring break?  Maybe join CMU in Haiti on their upcoming trip.
 
Free right after the spring semester?  Maybe join CMU Project Rwanda on their upcoming trip.
 
Want to stay closer to home, or sooner than the spring?  Great!  Check out these local community volunteer opportunities for CMU students.
 
Want to work from home, and use your coding skills, and still make a charitable contribution?  Excellent!  Check out HFOSS (the Humanitarian Free and Open Source Software Project).  No application necessary. Just log in and start helping!
 
Have another idea?  Superb!  DO IT!!!!!
 
Want to do something, just don't know what?  That's a great start.  Truly.  But then...  Carpe diem!  Do something about it.  Today.  Talk to CMU students, do your own web searches, find your niche and fill it.
 
Don't want to do something along these lines?  That's entirely ok.  There is no judgment here.  The point of this post is not to prod you into action against your will.  No way!  However, for those who do want to do something like this, the point is to help them turn those thoughts into actions, and those actions into real improved lives for real people.
 
Regardless, whether you share and pursue such goals or not:  the best way to learn 112, or anything else for that matter, is to start with a mind that is open to learning.  And to do that best, you need to attend not just to your mind but also to your body, your heart, and your soul.  You need to do this your way, whatever that means to you.  But be sure to do it!!!

Carpe diem.
 
David

Write the sorts from scratch! Today!
Hi all.  Many of your confusions (at least regarding this week's material) will gleefully dissolve if you simply follow this advice:  write bubbleSort, selectionSort, and mergeSort, along with their timing code, from scratch.  Today.  Now, even.
 
If you get stuck, refer to our reference solution here (the same one you need to do the first part of hw6).
 
Do not put this off.  Do not think "it's ok, I get it, I don't have to put in the time to actually write it to prove that I get it."  Wrong.  You do!  Really!

If you really do get it, then it will take just a few quick minutes, as a typing exercise.  No big deal.
 
But if it's longer than a few minutes, if it's not just a typing exercise, then indeed you do not get it!  And you definitely do need to study these sorts, and practice writing them, and repeatedly do so, until you do get it.
 
This week is deceptive.  It's easy to think you get it.  And then flop on the quiz and test because the only way past those is to really, truly understand this stuff.
 
It's not rocket science, but neither is it trivial.  With persistence and practice, you will get it.
 
So:  practice, practice, practice.
 
Good luck with it.
 
And...  Carpe diem.
 
David

quiz5 grades
Hi all.  Quiz5 grades are posted (thanks, CA's!!!).
 
The results are rock-solid, and almost fabulous.  The median of 73.5 is just fine, so the results indeed are favorable.  And most of the quiz went better than that -- ROC (Reasoning Over Code), and all the Free Response problems were great.  But the CT (Code Tracing) was not as strong.  This is very good for us to know, of course.  It tells us where to focus our collective efforts.
 
So, today in recitation, there will be more Code Tracing, particularly involving lists, aliases, and such.  Clearly, most of you need more work there.
 
That said, even with the lower CT scores, the quiz5 scores are something you can be proud of.  They show very solid results, and could only be had by way of extended, serious effort.  So: Kudos!!!!
 
Here's some summary data for you (thanks, Jordan!):

Overall	CT	ROC	Median	Prepend	NoDuplicateTypes
Median	73.5	63%	100%	80%	75%	75%
Average	70.19797	61%	71%	77%	76%	71%
St Dev (Points)	16.9	6.9	3.8	4.2	4.6	6.1
And a histogram of overall grades:

Inline image 1
Carpe diem.
David


hw7 will be a bit lighter
Hi all.  For your planning purposes:  next weekend is both Family Weekend and also the weekend before our first midterm.  For both these reasons, as well as the fact that you've put in tons of effort on the hw's so far, you can bank on hw7 being on the lighter side.  It may not be trivial, but it should not require as much time as some other hw's, at least not for most of you.
 
Something to bear in mind as you do hw6, perhaps.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw6 is posted
Hi all.  Hw6 is now posted.  Woohoo.  It is probably not quite as large as it may first appear, since several of the problems are actually quite small and straightforward.  That said, some others may be a bit challenging, so it's best to get as early a jump on it as possible.
 
Good luck with it!

David


The AMG clock starts now!
Hi all.  For those of you who have been struggling a lot so far:  by historic norms, you should now be beginning to feel some return on all your investment, some sense that things are at least beginning to come together.  Let's hope!  If that's so, and if you've been working hard, and continue to try hard, then AMG is designed with you in mind.
 
To recap: AMG is an alternate pathway to earn a C in the course (it will not lead to an A or a B, those are only available the old-fashioned way).  AMG basically only counts half your hw's and quizzes and midterms, then all of your term project and final.  And you do not have to sign up for AMG, everyone is considered for it automatically.
 
In any case: now we are halfway done with hw's and quizzes.  Which is to say: it is now really important that you try to be as consistent as possible from here onwards for AMG.  You do not have to score 70 on everything, but you do have to average 70 mostly from here on out in order to get that C in the course. So even if you cannot get every point on every hw, please be sure to get all the points you can.  Partial credit can make a huge difference for AMG.
 
You can do it, and we are definitely here to help.
 
Keep at it, and good luck!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

code from today's optional lecture
Hi all.  Today was good fun!  And we produced unusually toxic code.  Seriously.
 
But it worked, mostly!

Those who are interested, here it is (again, it's so toxic):
 
optionallecture6.py
 
and
 
textGenerator.py  (this converts "Alice in Wonderland" to just lowercase ascii and saves it)
 
Enjoy!
 
David

hw6 pre-release
Hi all.  Here it is, for those looking for a jump on this week's hw.  The full hw is due out tomorrow, as usual.  It's all due Sunday at 10pm, with a 10-point deduction up to Monday at 10pm.  And it's all SOLO, as usual.  You know the drill...

Note: many of this week's problems involve efficiency.  It will not be enough to have a technically correct answer.  It will also have to pass the autograder's timing tests.  These in general do not require optimal solutions, but they definitely require reasonably thoughtful and efficient solutions to receive credit.  In the full writeup, we will provide some test functions to you, at least for some of the problems, which will include some timing tests, to give you some idea if you are in the ballpark or not.
nthCarolPrime(n)
Write the function nthCarolPrime(n), which takes a non-negative int and returns the nth Carol Prime, which is a prime number of the form
     ((2k - 1)2 -2)
for some value positive int k.  For example, if k equals 3, ((23 - 1)2 -2) equals 47, which is prime, and so 47 is a Carol Prime.  The first several Carol primes are:
    7, 47, 223, 3967, 16127, 1046527, 16769023,...
As such, nthCarolPrime(0) returns 7.
Note:  You must use a reasonably efficient approach that quickly works up to n==9, which will return a 12-digit answer!  In particular, this means you cannot just edit nthPrime (or fasterIsPrime) to call isCarolPrime instead of isPrime.
 
nearestKaprekarNumber(n)
Background: a Kaprekar number is a non-negative integer, the representation of whose square can be split into two parts (where the right part is not zero) that add up to the original number again.  For instance, 45 is a Kaprekar number, because 45**2 = 2025 and 20+25 = 45.  You can read more about Kaprekar numbers here.  The first several Kaprekar numbers are: 1, 9, 45, 55, 99, 297, 703, 999 , 2223, 2728,...  With this in mind, write the function nearestKaprekarNumber(n) that takes a numeric value n and returns the Kaprekar number closest to n, with ties going to smaller value.  For example, nearestKaprekarNumber(49) returns 45, and nearestKaprekarNumber(51) returns 55.  And since ties go to the smaller number, nearestKaprekarNumber(50) returns 45.
Note: as you probably guessed, this also cannot be solved by counting up from 0, as that will not be efficient enough to get past the autograder.
 
bubblesortSimulator(app, canvas)
For this problem, you will use our Basic Interactive Graphics package to write a bubblesort simulator, similar to the xSortLab that we used in class (the link is provided in the course notes on efficiency).  You only have to do bubblesort, and you only have to do the Visual Sort (not the timed sort).  You do not have to include "Go" (run), just "Step".  And you do not need any buttons that work with mouse presses -- it can all be driven by keyboard commands if you wish ('s' to step and 'r' to restart; in any case, display some simple help text at the bottom of your screen, listing the keyboard commands and what they do).  You should use enough steps so that the algorithm is clear -- what is being compared, what the results of each comparison is, when swaps occur, which values are being swapped, and also when values are in sorted order.  You do not need to do a perfect knockoff of xSortLab.  In fact, you may vary your design quite a bit if you wish, so long as what you do (in our estimation) makes each step of the algorithm very clear. 
 
A fairly close xSortLab knockoff would get full credit.  But we will give up to 2.5 points of bonus for really nice designs that are quite unlike xSortLab and which do a great job in helping the user understand how bubblesort works.  That's not enough bonus for you to invest tons of effort into this, but it means that some nice work on your part could garner some extra well-earned points.
 
More tomorrow.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Tonight's optional lecture (compressed data in compressed time!)
Hi all.  We'll start at 6pm sharp, and end early (go, Pirates!!!!).
 
We'll do some data compression using Huffman Coding.  Fun stuff.
 
This is basically the second half of last week's talk, but really, you don't need last week's talk to attend this week's talk.
 
Should be fun.
 
And we should be done by 7:30pm!  :-)
 
Eamus Piratas!!!
 
Davd

Demosplash
Hi all.  This is not a 112 thing, just an event on campus this weekend that may interest some of you.  Enjoy!

David
 
You are awesome!
[ last post tonight (really) ]
 
Ok, so:  I won't let a few cheaters rob me of the joy of working with you, and seeing that nearly all of you are doing this right, are working very hard, learning a ton, and rapidly moving towards being really solid problem-solvers and coders.  Woohoo!
 
Once again, the median on the hw5 autograded portion was a perfect 40/40 (fully 283 of you got perfect scores on that part).  Stupendous!
 
And the intellectual vigor among you is exemplary!  You are using resources increasingly wisely, asking great questions at OH and on piazza, and coming up with clever and inventive solutions to increasingly hard problems.
 
It's all great.  So far, at least.
 
We have a long way to go.  You've just finished half the hw's.   So we have 5 more to go.  You've also finished half the quizzes.   So we have 4 more to go.  So you've come a long way, but there's also a long road ahead.
 
But hopefully you can increasingly feel your steady growth, and draw strength from that as we prepare for the upcoming midterm and then launch into the second, somewhat harder, but much shorter phase of the course.
 
Soon after that, we'll be in the homestretch, and you'll be doing term projects, making awesome projects of your own invention.
 
This will come sooner that you may think.  The next month disappears in a blink!
 
Anyhow, for now:  great job on hw5!!!!  And let's keep up the momentum!!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Our first serious cheating case (and maybe our second or third, too...) (please don't cheat!)
Hi all.  I was going to tell you how proud I am of how hard you are working, how great it is to see you learning so much and accomplishing so much.  But instead I have to report this:
 
We've had some mostly relatively minor violations so far this semester, mostly where students talked too much and too explicitly to each other.  And consequences were faced, and we marched on.
 
Now we have our first more serious cheating case (though the investigation is pending).  And maybe even a second or third (ditto).  Sadly, it is quite possible that some students will fail the course as a consequence.  And in any case they will get letters to the Dean of Student Affairs.  So you know: students who receive two such letters are generally required to take a year or two off, or sometimes are just outright expelled from the university.
 
Please, everyone:  don't cheat.  We have powerful automated tools to detect cheating.  And as the size and complexity of the hw's grows, the chances of getting caught also grow.  To nearly 100%.
 
So, please, please, please:  do not cheat.
 
It's so not worth it.  There's the whole depriving-you-of-learning thing.  There's also the ethics thing.  But if those are not your cup of tea, how about this one:  simple game theory says it's a losing game. If you cheat, you'll get caught with high likelihood, and you'll fail, and you'll get a letter to the dean.  And so will the person or persons you cheat with.
 
And then there's that lovely conversation with your parents...  Sigh...
 
It's all so unpleasant.  Let's please, please, please make this the last time this semester.
 
We are very much here to help you.  And if that's not enough, then just accept whatever outcome you can achieve honestly.
 
Please don't cheat.  It's such a bad decision, and one you will surely want back soon afterwards.
 
David

No extra submissions, but... Just a 5-point late-day deduction
Hi again.  So...  We know you are working very hard, and we want to reward that.  But we also have to stay true to the 5-submission cap, for the very good reasons already posited here.
 
How do we balance these two concerns in a way that is fair to everyone?
 
This is what we have decided:  yes, the 5-submission cap remains for tonight, but:
 
Everyone can submit tomorrow with just a 5-point deduction, rather than this semester's usual 10-point deduction.
 
This seems like the fairest way forward.
 
And you'll get 5 more submissions, too!
 
We hope this hits the right balance of fairly rewarding hard work while still promoting better testing skills.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

No extra submissions (well, not until after tonight)
Hi all.  We have received some students asking ardently for extra submissions.
 
Sorry, but this is not in your best interests, so we cannot oblige.
 
We looked very carefully at each request, and in every case the students involved did not carefully read or follow the specs, repeatedly submitted code that would not have passed the assertions we provided in the writeup, and/or made rapid-fire submissions without carefully checking every last detail of every function first.
 
This is exactly why the submission limit exists.  To stop this very behavior.
 
So: the limit stands.  It basically worked as designed...
 
Everyone who used up their submissions can submit tomorrow with a 10-point deduction (which is far kinder/gentler than the 25-point deduction from past semesters!).
 
We'll provide extra submissions tomorrow for that purpose.
 
And don't stress too much.  10 points are just not that much, and will barely register by the semester's end.   And it serves a great purpose, if it helps you in future weeks, not to mention in life after 112, to be much more careful about your testing and debugging.  That's the most important part of coding.  And now I think we all agree even more so how vital it is!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Python is not broken! The autograder is not broken! BasicAnimation is not broken!
Hi all.  We've had dozens and dozens of students this week declare that Python is broken, or the autograder is broken, or BasicAnimation is broken, or Python is broken.
 
In 100% of these cases, Python, the autograder, and BasicAnimation were all just fine.  Whew.
 
There is some tricky debugging this week.  Sometimes due to mismatching whitespace.  Sometimes due to destructive/non-destructive issues.  Sometimes due to event sequencing issues or other funky interactive graphics challenges.
 
These are indeed tricky to detect and diagnose.
 
But every time, so far, it has been a bug in student code.
 
This is not to say that Python, the autograder, or our animation code is perfectly bug-free.  It's not, most likely.
 
But it is to say that if your code *seems* to work to you, but not to the autograder, then the problem is almost surely in your code.

Be diligent and find your bugs!  Use well-placed print statements.  Be certain to use test functions, and then use the tests we provided to you, absolutely without any modification.
 
You can do this.  But don't take the easy road and declare your bug to be someone else's problem.
 
Own your bugs.  Then find them.  Then squash them!
 
Good luck!!!!
 
David

Histogram: *please* first pass the assert case we provided in the writeup
Hi all.  Easily the most-asked question is histogram.  And easily the biggest problem is whitespace.  And nearly 100% of all these questions are due to people submitting code that would fail against the assert we provided in the writeup.  So it had zero chance of getting past the autograder.
 
Please:  run the assert we provided in the writeup.  Totally unmodified.
 
And if it fails, then print out what you did return and very carefully compare the two to find the problem(s).
 
That is, do this:
 
    print histogram([73, 62, 91, 74, 100, 77])  # if the assert fails, carefully check this output!
    assert(histogram([73, 62, 91, 74, 100, 77]) == """
60-69: *
70-79: ***
80-89:
90++ : **
""")
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Actually, I just fixed the weird-error-on-destructive-parameters issue
Hi all.  Regarding @2431, I just patched the autograder so that should not happen anymore.
 
That should help some of you better understand some of the autograder feedback, especially for destructiveRotateList.
 
Hope this helps.
 
David


Important hint: destructive parameters are wrongly reported by the autograder
Hi again.  This is really important for errors in destructiveRotateList, though this is true any time you destructively modify a parameter with the autograder:
 
The error it generates is seemingly wrong!  There is an error, for sure, but the error report is incorrect.
 
Why?  Because it contains the modified argument, not the original argument value!

So:
 
Test code:       destructiveRotateList([1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4], 4)
  Expected result: [1, 2, 3, 4]
  Observed result: [1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4]
Here, the actual test was 
 
destructiveRotateList([1, 2, 3, 4], 4)
 
But the student's code modified the list to be [1,2,3,4,1,2,3,4], and then that modified list was used in the error report.
 
Please keep this in mind for errors when your function destructively modifies a parameter.
 
David

Use the new-and-improved error messages with version 0.3 of basicAnimation.py
Hi all.  I just posted a somewhat-improved version (0.3) of basicAnimation.py, which is available via the course notes, or right here:
    basicAnimation.py
 
In particular, this helps generate better error messages inside calls to canvas methods.
 
For example, say you did this:
 
canvas.create_text(50, 50, 50, text="One extra 50")
 
With the old version, you'd get this error:
 
Error in drawing method:  <bound method Canvas.create_text of <Tkinter.Canvas instance at 0x1018b17a0>>
 
Yuck!  And with the new version, you get this error:
 
Error unknown option "50" in canvas.create_text
 
Much better!  It's still not ideal, since you don't get line number information (for complex reasons best discussed later).  But still, it's a big improvement!
 
Anyhow, just delete the old version of basicAnimation.py and replace it with the new version, and you'll get these new and improved error message, which may make debugging a bit nicer.  :-)
 
Hope this helps!
 
David

Also: be sure your animations (including imports) go below the #ignore_rest line
Some of you are wasting a submission figuring this out...
 
Always, the parts that are not for the autograder, go below the #ignore_rest line. This includes the imports.  If you import basicAnimation above the #ignore_rest line, the autograder will fail on every test and you'll just get a 0/40 with no useful information...  Ugh.
 
Please be sure to place all non-autograded code below the #ignore_rest line!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Be sure to pass the provided histogram assertion, prior to submitting!
Hi all.  Many of you are submitting histogram functions which would not pass the assertion we provided to you in the problem statement.
 
Then, of course, you fail the autograder's tests, too.
 
The one we provided answers some key questions, such as:
* Is there a newline at the start?
* Is there a newline at the end?
* Is there a blank space after the ":" 
* Et cetera
 
We will not be answering these questions here.  You need to be certain that your code passes the assertion that we provided to you in the problem statement, and do that before submitting.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David


How not to write histogram...
Hi all.  It seems that some of you are trying really hard to avoid using lists for histogram, instead doing something like this:
 
if (val < 10): count0to9 += 1
elif (val < 20): count10to19 += 1
elif (val < 30): count20to29 += 1
...
 
Yikes!  This is most definitely the wrong way, and will get almost no points, as it violates several style rules.
 
Instead, use the yummy goodness of lists here!!!!
 
The right way involves using a list to store the counts.  If you can't see how, then head over to OH, the sooner the better!
 
Good luck with it!

David

hw5 autograder is live (and a couple hints)
Hi all.  It's there, and you have 5 submissions...  Use them wisely.
 
A couple suggestions based on early submissions:
 
* Be sure to think about rotating lists (destructively and nondestructively) when they are *empty* (size zero).
 
* Be sure your histogram does not start with a newline.
 
Also, since you only have 5 submissions:
 
* Be sure to write and test *all* the functions before submitting.   And then...
 
* Be sure to read all the errors, and try to fix all of them, before resubmitting.
 
Good luck!
 
David

Autograder --> Tomorrow (so test, test, test today!)
Hi all.  As you know, our goal is to eventually wean you entirely from the autograder.  As we take another step in that direction, the autograder this week will be posted tomorrow morning.
 
Of course, this makes it all the more important for you to thoroughly test your code, as much as possible, before tomorrow.  That's the point, after all.
 
Think of robust test cases, find all those edge cases, and test, test, test your code!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Please do not post grading inquiries to piazza (@1979)
Please see @1979.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Style grades (or, how not to lose 10 points on hw5) (please read!)
Hi all.  The hw4 style grades are now posted.  And they were, well, not very good.  Though, to be fair, hw4 style scores are never, ever very good.  Every semester it takes a few weeks for this style thing to really take hold. 
 
So: no worries.  But: let's fix this!
 
Please carefully read your hw4 style comments.  Really.  Right now.
 
No, really.  Go read them.  Then come back and finish this post.
 
No, really....
 
Ok, now:  And please take those hw4 style comments to heart.  And then, please fix your hw5 submissions so they completely abide by our style guidelines.
 
Our goal:  a median style penalty of -4 for hw5, -2 for hw6, and a perfect median -0 from then on.
 
We can do this!!!!
 
The hard part is the problem-solving.  Good style is not hard.  At first, yes, it is tedious.  But eventually, you just get used to it, and you can't help but to write code with good style.
 
And then, forevermore, you get to benefit from all that yummy goodness that good style promotes.  You will write your code faster, it will be clearer, it will have fewer bugs, and will get you better grades.  Such good things!!!  :-)
 
For now, read those style comments (do not skip that step), and try really hard to improve your style grades on hw5.
 
Good luck with it!

David

Pearson Student Coding Contest
Hi all.  This is entirely optional, and not really for 15-112, but something you might be interested in.  We have no connections with Pearson, but they have asked us to share this information:
 
Pearson Student Coding Contest
 
Could be fun!  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David (Professor $LASTNAME$)

hw5 clarifications and such
Hi all.  Here are some hw5 clarifications and such for you on this lovely Saturday morning!  Hope some of them help.  :-)
 
How to test a destructive function
Say you have a destructive function f(a) and you want to test it.  Since it returns None (right?), you can't just do:
    assert(f([1,2,3]) == "whatever we expect")
Instead, assign it to a variable, call the destructive function, then do your test, like so:
   a = [1,2,3]
   f(a)  # destructive
   assert(a == "whatever we expect")

Animation: Relaxed line limit for animations this week
Remember that there is no line limit just this week just for animations.  20 lines still apply in general, and 25-lines for non-animation graphics (which you might also have, say if you decide to use graphics helper functions for your animations).

Animation parameters
The parameters to your animations should be (app, canvas), like so:
    def superSimpleCalculator(app, canvas):...

Animations use delete(ALL)
Some of you are expressing concern over the inefficiency of deleting everything on every step, just to redraw all of it.  Don't worry about it.   This way is way easier than just changing what changed, and it is plenty fast enough for now.  So for now (and for a while), everyone should just use delete(ALL) like we did in our examples.

Animations do not use console input or output
Animations must get their user input strictly via keypress events, and never via raw_input.  And they must show their output strictly using graphics, and not via the console.  You can use the console for debugging, but only for debugging.  Think about it:  when you use a GUI program (which is pretty much the only kind of program you probably use), do you ever see a text console?  No!

Specious!
This hint is specious!  Is it even a hint?
 
Calc: BackSpace is a keysym
The problem correctly stated that you'll need to use event.char in your calculator.  But it did not rule out using event.keysym, which in fact you will also need for backspace.  Also, note that the keysym is "BackSpace", with an upper-case "S".

Calc: 015 is octal!
In Python, any number with a leading 0 is considered to be in octal (base 8).  So 015 is actually decimal 13.  This is also how your calculator will work.  It's odd, but correct.

Calc: use integer division
You're just calling eval, so 18/5 will equal 3, naturally...

Animations are underspecified
The animation videos do not specify everything.  So you need to fill in the blanks with reasonable assumptions.  Please do not ask on piazza for the "answers" to all these design decisions.  Just make them, and be reasonable.  For example, we do not specify the fonts we used (though we do have a preference for "Arial", though again, we never said that).  And for a more technical example, in the calculator, we never say what to do with unused punctuation, such as $.  You could make it an error, so don't add it to the text, and turn the text red.  Or you could make it not an error, add it to the text, make the text blue, and then upon eval show the runtime error.  This was not specified, so you have to choose which design seems to make more sense (to the user, that is).
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
hw5 posted, along with bonus
It's really just the pre-release and the two interactive graphics problems along with the few hints already posted here.  But now it's all pretty in HTML and on the course website.  :-)
 
Also, the bonus is fun.  The first bonus is not much work.  Note that the page on centroids includes how to find them for arbitrary polynomials, if you scroll far enough down.  Pretty easy and fun way to get a point or two!
 
Anyhow, good luck, and have fun!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw5: histogram upper and lower bound clarification
Hi all.  The histogram should start with the first range which is non-zero, and end with the last range which is non-zero.  So if the lowest score is 72, the first range should be 70-79.  And if in the same example the highest score was 78, then the *only* range would be 70-79.
 
Also, the 0-9 range should be 00-09.
 
Hope this helps.
 
David

event.char vs event.keysym (important for hw5's simple calculator)
Hi all.  For hw5, you'll need to use event.char, which is similar to event.keysym but different sometimes.
 
For punctuation, event.char contains the single character typed, whereas event.keysym contains the NAME of that character.
 
The reason we used event.keysym in the notes is because "Up" (and the other arrow keys) is *only* available as a keysym and not a char.  SIgh.
 
Anyhow, please use event.char for hw5's simple calculator.
 
Thanks.
 
David

quiz4 scores in the bigger picture
Hi again.  Let's pan out even further...
 
* Everyone at CMU does exceedingly well in the job market.  Everyone.  Including those who got some low scores on 112 quizzes.  Even including those who get some low semester grades on their transcripts.
 
* To my knowledge, no interviewer has ever asked a CMU student what their grade was on quiz4 in their 112 class, or even their overall quiz average.  Ever.
 
This is not to say this stuff does not matter.  It does.  But your life is the integral of so many parts of you -- intellectual, emotional, spiritual, physical, and so on.  And they all matter!  A lot!  After all, these parts all make up a single whole -- there is only one you, and the path to a happy, successful, and satisfying life involves developing every part of you, and not just your mind.
 
Even if we focus just on your intellectual life, just your academic self is still the integral of all your courses and many other academic experiences.  And even just your transcript is still the integral of dozens of courses.  And even just your 112 grade is still the integral of dozens of quizzes, hw's, exams, and of course the grade-buoying term project.
 
So a few 112 quizzes, even all of them, taken together, just amount to a very small part of one course, which is just part of many courses, which are all just one part of your academic story, which still is just one part (and probably not even the most important part) of your life story.
 
You've been adults for a short while now, you've hardly yet begun writing your life story. So please don't lose perspective.  You are in your own novel, and maybe something untoward happens to the protagonist in the middle of page 38.  It happens (wouldn't novels be, well, boring without at least some twists now and then?).  But there are hundreds and hundreds of pages to go, with countless twists and turns and intrigue and challenges and goals and aspirations and achievements and love and satisfaction and failure and triumph.
 
Enjoy page 38, try to make it even better (it is your story, after all, and your actions and behaviors do affect it!), but let's all keep this in perspective.  Soon, these quizzes will be a faded blur of a memory, all lumped together into your 112 experience, which itself will blend into its proper place in your CMU chapter of life.
 
Get what you need out of 112. Learn to program.  Learn to problem-solve.  Learn to manage your time effectively.  Learn to use your resources wisely.  Learn to be an active part of an extraordinary intellectual community.  And, hopefully, have some fun along the way.  Truly.
 
And don't stress while doing it.  You'll have ups and you'll have downs.  But trust in yourself.  You are smart, you are dedicated, and you will do just fine in 112, and it will serve as another step preparing you for the successful life you are building for yourself.  This is simply how it will be.
 
Quiz4 is just a very, very small part of that very large and beautiful picture.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
 
quiz4 scores in the big picture
Hi again.  Let's take a step back, and put those quiz4 scores further in perspective.
 
After 4 quizzes, the median quiz average (which takes half-weighting of two lowest quizzes into account) is a quite-solid 78.  That's fine.
 
And after 3 hw's, the median hw average is a rock-solid 94.5.  Excellent!
 
This leads to a currently-inflated median course average of 89.9, so fully half of you right now have an A in the course, even with those quiz scores.  But, as noted before, this is artificially inflated because it will overweigh hw's at least until we get a midterm or two in there.
 
Even so...  There are some historic trends you should know:
 
* Quizzes and hw's basically bookend your grades.  Quizzes are the lowest part of your grade, and hw's the highest, for nearly everyone.  So your semester grade will land somewhere between those probably, and then probably closer to your hw than to your quiz average.
 
* So: a low, even very low, quiz average is not disastrous.  Not so long as you respond as intended, and take it seriously, and try to learn and grow from it.
 
* Also: midterm scores are usually higher than quiz scores.  For a few reasons.  First, you've had 2 months of practice and learning by then, and you are simply quite measurably stronger than before.  That makes a huge difference.  And second, you will be under slightly less time pressure, partly by the design and duration of the exam, partly due to your increased fluency and mastery.  These combine to make midterm scores reliably higher than quizzes.
 
* The same effects are further amplified on the final exam.  Final exam scores tend to be higher than midterm scores, which tend to be quite a bit higher than quiz scores.
 
* Also, term projects make up a large chunk of your semester grade, and these tend to be very good, with a median higher than everything except the hw's.  So term projects tend to drive up many grades.
 
* By historic measures for 15-112, your current quiz median is high, among the highest ever.
 
* Taking all this together, you are all doing just fine.  Even better than just fine.  You are putting in lots of effort, and should be starting to really feel the results.  The expressions-loops-and-conditionals material from weeks1-2 should be getting really familiar to you.  The strings-and-graphics-and-lists material should be more and more familiar each week, too.  So stick with it, you are doing just fine.
 
* And there it is.  A median of 69, taken out of context, may seem low, and perhaps cause for concern.  It's neither, really.  It means exactly what I've already said:  you are doing just fine, and more work remains.
 
Let's get to it!!!

Carpe diem.
 
David

quiz4 scores
Hi all.  After a herculean 6.5-hour grading marathon (!), our CA's got quiz4 graded.  Great job, CA's!
 
And the results were....  Good.  Not spectacular, but still good, and reflective of lots of collective effort on your part, and probably better than the score suggests at first blush.
 
The median was 69.  This is within one point of the quiz3 median, without the +5 bonus that was added to that quiz.  So there's some consistency week-to-week.
 
These scores mean this:  (1) there is a whole lot of effort going in and a whole lot of learning going on, as otherwise on these kinds of quizzes the scores would be dramatically lower; but (2) there also remains room for growth.
 
The quizzes should be highlighting for each of you the areas where you need to concentrate your studying efforts to gain the overall mastery and fluency that we are aiming for.  And to do this by the upcoming midterm exam, if possible.
 
Many of you would benefit from practicing previous semesters' quizzes (the relevant portions, of course), under quiz conditions.  And also from writing lots of small functions, quickly, from scratch.   Many of you of course are already doing these things.  But you need to keep doing these things as much as you can, starting from week1 and working forwards.  The more, the better.  That's how fluency works.
 
Practice, practice, practice....
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw5 next portion (interactive graphics)
Hi all.  The full hw5 formal writeup may not be out until later tonight or even early tomorrow morning.  But it's just the pre-release along with these two additional problems, assigned here by video (figuring that it's easier to just show you an interactive program than to explain it in words):
 
     hw5-superSimpleCalculator.mov

and
     hw5-drawPolygonPointsWithUndoRedo.mov
Just try to match each video as closely as you can.
If you have no idea how to get started on this, don't worry.  But do go to tonight's session and to tomorrow's recitation.  They'll each do some simple interactive graphics, but that may be invaluable in getting you started on this part of the hw.
The writeup will contain a few hints, too (for example: our sample solution used two lists of (x,y) tuples in the second problem -- a pointList and an undoList).
But we are posting this here now so that some of you might perhaps get a jump on this if you are so inclined.
Enjoy!
Carpe diem.
David

Code from yesterday's optional lecture
Hi all.  Fun times were had!  And we still have no idea how those pizza boxes got there...  :-)
 
Here (optionallectureweek5.py) is the code we wrote.  As usual, please do not use this code, it was written hastily and is surely toxic.  It's just for illustrative purposes.
 
And some bugs/problems were fixed:
 
* Right after lecture, an astute student correctly pointed out that our radixSort was not linear chiefly because we were testing over range(n).  So as n grew, the max number of digits required also grew.  So that was a problem.  By changing how we set up our list, so it always included max numbers of roughly the same size, that was taken care of.  Sweet (and smart observation!).
 
* Also, while walking back to my office, I realized the obvious reason why the radixSort we were using failed the assert.  Because it was nondestructive.  So it didn't change the list AT ALL, let alone sort it.  So I added a wrapper that took that nondestructive result and copied it back into the original list.  Problem solved.
 
* I also downloaded the radixSort example from Wikipedia (which is also nondestructive), and added that to the attached code, just for fun.
 
There you have it.  Fun times.
 
Thanks again, and enjoy!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

My OH: Today --> Tomorrow
Hi all.  Please note that my OH today are rescheduled to tomorrow, still noon to 2pm.  Hope to see some of you there!  :-)
 
Thanks.
 
David

hw5 pre-release
Hi all.  I hope you all get to spend some time outside in the glorious sunshine today!  And for those who have some spare time after that, here's the pre-release of hw5.  Enjoy!
 
David

Tonight's optional/advanced lecture
Hi all.  In tonight's optional/advanced lecture, we'll look at a way to sort data reasonably efficiently, then twist that around into a way to compress data.  Should be good fun!  :-)
 
If we have time leftover, we'll either reconsider the assembler+VM issue (probably not, it needs lots of time, will book later), or move on to cover some other really interesting sorting algorithms.
 
Note that next week in class we'll cover some less advanced but still really interesting sorting algorithms...
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

A few more submissions for the late deadline
Hi all.  For those working towards the late deadline tonight, you have a few more submissions to work with.
 
This is not an extension.  It's just to let those who used up all their submissions yesterday to still submit late if they wish.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

When solution sessions overlap due dates...
Hi all.  Tonight's hw4 solution session runs from 8 to 10pm, but many of you will submit hw4 at the 10pm late deadline tonight.
 
To be clear:  you cannot submit any hw once you have attended any portion, even just a minute or two, of its solution session.
 
It's obvious, but worth repeating, so there it is.
 
Of course, there is also a solution session on Wed night, so you're fine.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

SOLO means SOLO (required reading)!
Hi all.  Nearly all of you are doing a great job so far following the SOLO hw rules.  As a consequence, nearly all of you also are learning a great deal, very rapidly, about coding, debugging, and (most importantly) problem-solving.  Kudos!!!
 
However...  A few of you have violated the terms of the SOLO hw's, already resulting in some serious consequences.  This is very unfortunate.
 
Nobody wins when you do that.  The friend who "helps" by supplying answers is actually hurting, depriving their friend of the chance to really learn the material.  And the recipient is certainly hurting the provider, too, since they most likely will get caught (we have very effective automated tools for this), and face serious consequences (we do not discern provider from consumer in general in these matters).
 
Let's all please make better decisions moving forward.
 
You are immersed in a sea of support, with CA's providing tons of OH and literally round-the-clock piazza support.
 
And if that's not enough, if you can't solve a problem or two in the time you can give the hw, then... Just submit what you can, and accept the result.  Learn as much as you can, and try to improve your time management and resource utilization and overall performance in the future.
 
This is not to say that you should lower your standards.  Not at all!  But cheating is no way to maintain standards.  Cheating *is* lowering your standards.
 
Instead, maintain high standards, and learn to achieve and even surpass those standards, while making really solid decisions showing the kind of mature judgment on which you can build a great career, both here at CMU and beyond.
 
As always, we are here to help.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
 
(3 weeks on, 1 week off) * 3
Hi again.  So we've just completed the big 4-week push to get us up to full speed.  And now we are at full speed.  Whew!
 
From here on out, the course does not increase in intensity, and follows a 3-on/1-off pattern.
 
So the next 3 weeks are on, with new material and hw's, and then you get a week off (well, there's a midterm, but no new material and no hw for a full week, including a post-midterm weekend when you can... r...e...l...a...x...!).
 
Then, 3 more weeks of fairly hard but fun material, with 3 more hw's, and then another week with no new material or hw (though, yes, another midterm, you know the drill).
 
Then, 3 more weeks of term project intensity, followed by another week (give or take) with nothing assigned.
 
Then our final, then we're done.
 
(3-on, 1-off)*3.  That is definitely manageable.
 
Good luck with it!
 
Carpe diem.

David

Tremendous job, everyone!
Hi all.  Well, hw4 is mostly behind us, though indeed around 100-150 of you may continue working to tonight's 10pm late deadline.
 
The results were tremendous.  Once again, the median autograded score was a perfect 50/50.  Fabulous!  And the CA's did a herculean job trying to help in OH and on piazza, not just last night but across the entire assignment.  Great work, everyone!
 
If you did not score near-perfect, don't fret.  These are among your first challenging programs ever.  If they challenged you, even a lot, that's entirely understandable and predictable.  Even if you get a low score on hw4, you are just fine, so long as:  (1) you tried hard; (2) you submitted your best work that you could given the time you could invest; and -- big one here -- (3) you attend the solution sessions and try very hard to really master everything from hw4.  Do that, and you're fine.  Truly.
 
Great job, folks!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw4: a few more submissions
Hi all.  To help in the homestretch, you now have up to 8 total submissions on hw4.
 
We will not be making such last-minute additions in general.  But we did here, so make the most of it!

Carpe diem.
 
David

hw4 AMG for autograded problems
Hi all.  Another thing: for those of you who score below 25/50 on the autograded portion on hw4, we will provide AMG-style grading on that portion.  Meaning that we will manually assign some partial credit.  That is capped at 25/50 in any case.
 
Hope this helps.
 
David

Grading concerns?
Hi all.  Here is a reminder of some course policies on grading issues:
 
* To save lots of emails to me, please note:  when autolab says "graded by koz", what it means is "graded by the whole team of CA's, and only uploaded by koz".
 
* In any case, please be sure to check your grades regularly.  At least once a week.
 
* Do not just view the scores, but click on them, and carefully read the comments, which explain why the scores are what they are.
 
* If you have simple grading questions, please direct them to your section CA's.  They can help clear up 90% of grading questions.
 
* If you have grading concerns, please direct them first to our Head CA, Jordan (jzink).  He can help clear up 90% of grading concerns.
 
* If you are in the 1% who still have concerns after speaking with Jordan, then (and only then) please do come see either Prof Ada or me.  We are happy to help.  But if you bypass this process and see us first, we'll just direct you back to the process.
 
* Consider:  each of you takes around 8 quizzes, 3 exams, and 10 homeworks, for over 20 graded assessments, each with 7-10 items to grade.  So that's 150+ graded items per student, times 400+ students, equals 60k graded items.  We have a super-low error rate.  But even if we grade at 99.9% correctness (and we can't realistically get past that), that means there will be at least 60 grading issues this semester.  And if we are closer to "just" 99% correctness (and fortunately, we are definitely higher than that!), that balloons to 600 issues!  Yikes!  So it is bound to happen.  And often enough that we need a system in place to manage this.  Which we do.  So please understand and please work within the system.
 
* Also: we really do maintain well over 99% correctness (which is pretty awesome, and a great testament to our wonderful CA's!!!).  So most grading issues turn out to be confusions in understanding the grading, and not grading errors.  And when it comes to second-guessing our CA's on judgment calls, we generally will not do that.  We will not nitpick small points here and there.  We very happily will fix any major grading error, of course, but we will not pick apart every tiny detail of a rubric.  So please only pursue genuine grading errors, as those do happen on occasion, and we will fix them.
 
Thanks!
 
David

Carpe diem
Hi all. This is the 19,732nd and final contribution to Piazza for this semester (no kidding!).  It's been a great ride.  I have really enjoyed working with all of you, and thank you for all your great energy and enthusiasm.  Your term projects were especially fun to be part of.  Great job!!!!  Also, many thanks to our amazing CA's, without whom all this would be utterly impossible.  Thanks!!!!
 
And so.  Now you are intermediate programmers.  What does that mean?  Was this worth it?  That's to be decided.  It depends on what you DO with all that hard-won programming prowess you now have.  Sure, Tetris is fun to write, but you now can go do REAL things, things that MATTER, things that you care about, things that will shape the world and make it a better place.
 
I can't wait to hear about it!  Please do let me know from time to time.
 
And in closing, from my heart, I hope that you do seize the day, every day, and do something to try to improve your life and the lives of those around you.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Code from today's optional lecture
Hi all.  Here is the code from today's optional lecture:
   ourLanguageTilde.py
 
That was great fun.  Thanks everyone!!!
 
David

Semester grades entered
Hi all.  I just finished all the reviews and bubble cases, and entered semester grades into FIO.  They should appear in your SIO sometime soon.  Once again, it was a solid showing, one earned by months of hard work and fine results on your part.  Kudos!!!
 
Also, reminder:  the last optional lecture of the semester runs today from 11am to 2:30pm in GHC 4307.  If you do attend, please be on time, since the material is cumulative.  Thanks.  :-)
 
And this:  if you have not done so already, please do fill out FCE's.  And please also email or otherwise send me any longer thoughts you might have about how we can improve this course in the future.  Thanks again!  :-)
 
Almost there...
 
Carpe diem.
 
David


More about grades (please read)
Hi all.   Having just received lots of emails with questions about grades, hopefully this can help further clarify.  Please read...
 
* 38% and 75%
As the numbers shape up, fully 38% of you will receive A's as your semester grade, and 75% will receive A's or B's.  That's a LOT.  Even so, there has to be a line somewhere between A's and B's.  And wherever we draw that line, there will be students *just* below it.  But that's not an argument for moving them above it, since then there are students just below *that* line.  So the line is where it was advertised, at 89.5.  And yes, that means some students will just barely miss.  For those, I will carefully review the grades, but in general the grades are correct, and in general things will wind up as they are now.
 
* course average
The single number that "matters" in the Autolab gradebook is the "Course Average".  That takes everything into account.
 
* +1 magic bonus pont
If you do your own computation, you'll realize we added a magic +1 point to everyone's Course Average.  Truly!  This helps keep things fair semester by semester.  In any case, that magic +1 is factored in already.  Enjoy!  :-)
 
* amg
The AMG computation has a max of 70.  Your Course Average is the *larger* of AMG and traditional scoring.  For anyone with a course average above 70, this means that the amg has no effect whatsoever on your grade.
 
* tmp
There is that tmp grade still there.  It says 0.  Ignore it.  It has no effect on your grade computation.
 
* change an 88 to a 90?
I received two such requests already, to simply change 88's into 90's.  Sorry, but we just can't do that.  We must maintain the integrity of the course and the institution.  Besides, an 88 is quite far from a 90...  In any case, a B is a rock-solid grade in a challenging technical course at a world-class university.  You can be proud of that grade.  And it will serve you well.  Truly.  It can open doors, help you at job interviews, and certainly shows you are well-prepared for all the computational challenges that lie in your future.  Not everyone can get an A, though many of you did.  For the rest of you, you are still on a path to success.  Truly.
 
* Regrade for cause
Please do not ask for a regrade due only to a low grade.  Regrades are only for possible errors.  So if you request a regrade, you must explain exactly why you think there may have been a grading error.  "Because my grade was too low" is not such a reason.  On the other hand, "because my grader and I both forgot to grade the part where I solved subsetSum in polynomial time" would indeed be such a reason.
 
Hope this helps clarify matters.
 
Again, I need to do some work this weekend before computing semester letter grades.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Last OH of the semester, today starting at 12:30pm
Hi all.  I will host my last scheduled OH of the semester today, starting at 12:30pm, ostensibly until 2pm, but I may be able to run just a bit longer if needed.
 
Graded final exams are in my office and can be reviewed, though they must not physically leave my office (we keep these on physical file for a long time...).
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

tp, final, and amg grades released
Hi all.  Though we're not quite done computing overall semester grades on edge cases (see below), lots of grades are now available:
 
* tp3 grades and comments are available now.  Please bear in mind that the grading process is extensive, designed to give fair and consistent results across hundreds of very different projects.  For this reason, please limit any grade change inquiries to obvious and significant grading errors, should there be any.
 
* overall tp grades are also computed now, weighted as given in the tp writeup (10% on tp1, 10% on tp2, 80% on tp3)
 
* final exam grades are adjusted.  Raw median was 73.  Adjusted score = raw_score/73*82.  So adjusted median is 82.
 
* amg grades are computed as given in the syllabus
 
* course grades are the max of either the traditional or the amg computation
 
* Semester letter grades are based on the "course grade".  I will round up, so 89.5 is an A.
 
* For those "on the bubble", within a few tenths of the next letter up, I will be reviewing your cases over the weekend to determine what the appropriate semester letter grade is.  Sometimes in those cases I do move the grade up, sometimes not.  But I never move a grade down below where the numeric value in Autolab says it should be.
 
* For this reason, I probably cannot enter semester letter grades before Monday.
 
* If you have questions, you may email me or attend today's OH.
 
* I'll post here when semester letter grades are available.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Last optional lecture: Saturday, 11am, GHC 4307
Hi all.  Grading is almost done (should be posted by tonight, hopefully).  We're ever closer to wrapping up the semester....
 
Next up:  the last optional lecture of the semester.  It's this Saturday, starting promptly at 11am (please be on time if you are attending), in GHC 4307.  We'll run to 2pm, maybe 2:30pm.  We'll write our own little programming language.  Should be good fun.  Attendance, of course, is optional.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.

David

Ignore that last message (but please do fill out your FCE's!)
Hi all.  A student accidentally posted a course-wide message that was seemingly for some other course.  Please ignore it (and let's be careful about avoiding any more spam here -- thanks!).
 
While we are not handing out points to fill out FCE's, we are handing out our gratitude, and you can be sure we sure do carefully read and consider all the feedback we receive.  So please do fill out your FCE's if you've not done so yet.
 
Thanks!
 
David

My OH this week
Hi all.  Here are my OH hours this week:
 
   Today (Tuesday): noon to 1pm
   Thursday:  12:30pm to 2pm
   Friday:  12:30pm to 2pm
 
We hope to have final exam and term project grades in Autolab before my Thursday OH.
 
Good luck on your other finals!
 
David

TP gallery -- reload nav pane
Hi all.  If you are seeing the old TP gallery, you need to right-click in the nav pane one the left, and then select reload frame.  That'll do it.  :-)

David

Black jacket left at final exam today
Hi all.  Someone left their black jacket at the final exam today.  It can be claimed at my office soon-ish or tomorrow around noon.
 
David

TP Gallery is live!
Hi all.  As the subject says...  Check out all the great projects by so many of your classmates.
 
Great job, everyone!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Time to sleep
Hi all.  And so here we are, 9.5 hours from go-time.  Just enough time to get a full night's sleep and wake up refreshed, get a decent breakfast and go for a short, brisk walk to get the blood flowing.  And then, of course, take the final.
 
Point being:  the time for studying has passed.  Any studying you do now will be counterproductive.
 
The time for sleep is upon us.
 
I'm sleeping even as I type this. Well, nearly...
 
And you hopefully are sleeping even as you read it.  Ok, stop reading and go to sleep!
 
Verily, go to bed now.  It's really in your best interests.
 
And best of luck tomorrow.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Important #2: Your physical Andrew Id photo card is required to take the final exam!
Hi again.  With 350+ students taking exams across several rooms, we must have some basic exam security in place.
 
To that end:  you must have a physical andrew id card to enter the room, and you must present your andrew id card to submit your exam.  Since not every CA knows every student, the simple rule is that everyone will have their photo on the andrew id card checked for their likeness, even if we know who you are.  This is the fairest and easiest way to proceed, and we appreciate your understanding.
 
Thanks.  And, once again, good luck!!!

David

Important: Final Exam Room Assignments
Hi all.  Tomorrow's final exam room assignments are listed on our course website (in the schedule), and also right here:
 
   DH 2210: Andrew Id's from AAA*** to JIA***
   DH 2315: Andrew Id's from JIN*** to SJO***
   DH 2302: Andrew Id's from SKA*** to ZZZ***
 
The fun starts at 8:30am.  Please show up early.  Please sit every other seat.  If that is not possible and some people have to sit next to each other, then do so in the front row(s) only.  Thanks.
 
Good luck, and ...  Carpe diem.
 
David


Stay up late, get really stressed, study endlessly, and other clever ways to ruin your final
Hi all.  So here we are, two days before the final exam.  What should you do?
 
Not much.
 
Really.
 
You've spent nearly 4 months studying this material.  Ok, maybe more like 2 to 3 months, accounting for spring break, Carnival, and the natural ebb and flow of college life.
 
In any case, you have invested a LOT of time and energy.  Your collectively wonderful term projects prove that point beyond a doubt.
 
At this point, there is very little left to learn.  You really are done with this course and ready to move on.  Really.
 
Though, yes, we do have to take the final exam (it's actually a requirement placed on me, right down to the 20% weighting, though I think it's not a crazy requirement).  And so, yes, you probably should study a bit for it.  Somewhat for good form, but also to refresh your memory of some topics we haven't covered for a while.
 
So SOME studying is a good thing.  But only some studying, not too much.
 
Leave some time to relax a little, to socialize a bit, to eat right, to exercise, to de-stress, and -- above all -- to SLEEP.
 
The two easiest ways to destroy your final are with TOO MUCH STRESS and TOO LITTLE SLEEP.
 
So don't go there.  Regardless of how prepared you are now, pretty much that's where you are.  The way to do your best isn't to heroically cram for hours on end.  That will backfire, and your grade will go down, maybe way down.  Really.  No, the way to do your best is to study just a bit, and relax, and get well-rested, and just give it your best shot.  That's it.
 
One last thing:  the exam is very early Monday morning.  Well, very early for college students anyway.  So you should start adjusting your schedule.  Wake up earlier tomorrow than usual, which also means that you need to go to bed earlier tonight than usual.  Yes, it's a Saturday night, but still, do the right thing.  You can stay up to 4am next Saturday night.  Woohoo.  Tonight, lights out early.  You'll be glad you did it.
 
Success is largely though not entirely behavioral.  Luck favors a prepared mind.  If you keep your stress down, get your sleep, eat right, socialize, exercise, study a bit, and maintain your balance, you might be surprised just how "lucky" you are on Monday.
 
Good luck, and carpe diem.

David

About APT
Hi all.  Many thanks again to APT for sponsoring our TP Showcase.  For those who are interested in learning more about APT, here you go:

To students who were enrolled in that "phantom" lecture earlier this semester...
Hi all.  This is just for the small group of students who were enrolled in that "phantom" lecture earlier this semester (the one that was created to make room for you despite the roster wrongly claiming there wasn't any room).  Well, I have learned that the students in this group apparently are unable at this time to enter FCE's for this course.  Ugh.  I am working with the dean's office trying to get this resolved.  I apologize for the inconvenience, and I'll post back here when there is some news on this front.  Meanwhile, we'll work hard to get you into the FCE system, and rest assured that I definitely wish to hear your feedback, and welcome it in any form you might provide it.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Be certain to be on time (early, even) to your tp3 meetings!
Hi all.  Due to sheer number of meetings (350+), each with 2 CA's, and the lengthy grading and normalization process after these meetings, we cannot offer make-ups for missed meetings.  So be sure not to miss your meetings!!!  And don't be late, since we also cannot run late.
 
If you do miss a meeting, your participation grade will go down a bit, but also grading will go on without your input, which is probably not in your best interests.
 
So:  be there, and be on time!
 
Thanks, and good luck with it!
 
David


Reminder: optional recitation all day!
Hi all.  Again in response to some queries:  recitation is running all day today.  We'll be prepping for the final exam.   It is optional, and you can attend as many recitations today as you wish.
 
Enjoy!  And good luck on the final!
 
David

Recursion and Monte Carlo and the final
Hi all.  In response to some queries:  both recursion and Monte Carlo are indeed on the final (not just "may" be on the final, but "will" be on the final!).  However, we did not cover these on hw's, and so you are not expected to have the same depth of understanding as other topics.  Even so, you will be writing some free response for them.  You might imagine those problems will not be the hardest ones ever asked on a final exam.  So you might study the course notes and the recitation materials and be sure you understand them reasonably well and can reproduce them from first principles.  That's basically all you need for those topics.
 
Good luck with it!
 
David

Please fill out FCE's and give us feedback!
Hi again.  Another very important end-of-semester activity is for us to gather feedback from you, so we can try to improve this course in the future.  Your opinions matter to us, you can be certain we will take them to heart.  We especially welcome criticism, though we ask that you state it constructively, and ideally with an eye towards how it might be improved.  And sometimes we make even large-scale changes to the course's design based on your input.  So we very much welcome whatever you have to say.  
 
You have several ways to provide this input.
 
First, everyone: please fill out FCE forms.  Today is a fine day to do that!   Here is the link to the FCE site.  Please do this!  We want to hear from you!!!!
 
Second, we welcome longer feedback than might be easily entered on an FCE form.  For that, you may email me your thoughts.  If you want to maintain anonymity, we respect that, then perhaps print your feedback and slip it under my door.  Again, you can be sure I will read it and give it careful consideration.
 
Third, there are those small-group roundtable sessions next week.  Sign-ups are completed for those, but we might arrange another one if there was demand for it.
 
Fourth, you can always stop by my OH, any time this semester or any time at all.  You are always welcome.
 
Bottom line:  let your voice be heard!  Help us shape 15-112 into a better course in the future.
 
Thanks, and...  Carpe diem!

David

Optional TP Gallery Sign-Up Form (responses encouraged!)
Hi all.  Thanks again to everyone for a fun event last night, and for sharing such wonderful projects!  :-)   Now we have some wrapping up to do (not to mention a final exam to prepare for!).
 
First off:  now is when we build our own semester's term project gallery.  I hope many of you participate.  I imagine many of you found the previous galleries helpful in some way as you conceived and built your own term projects.  This is your way to share that same virtue with future 15-112 students.  What's more, these links are a way for you to easily share your work with future employers, say for summer internships next year.  In any case, we welcome everyone, regardless of your grade.  The gallery works best with a large mix of projects of all kinds.
 
But the gallery most certainly is 100% optional!
 
If you are interested, please fill out this sign-up form.  Some of you have said you wish to make better videos.  Great!  Even so, you are encouraged to sign up now with your current video, and then you can update your video if you wish, at any time really (not just in the next few days).  Just send me the new link and I'll update the gallery accordingly. 
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Presentation emails were sent
Hi all.  To confirm:  we sent emails a short while ago to those who will be presenting tonight.
 
David

Another reminder: Please bring a pen and paper tonight
Thanks.  And see you soon!  :-)

David


"Late" tp submissions
Hi all.  Some of you have not yet submitted your term projects.  We do not accept late projects in general, and so I need to speak with each of you.  However, it is imperative that we get the bits right now.  So, if you have not yet submitted, submit NOW.
 
You will get a 100-point late penalty by default, but at least we'll have your project and then you and I can meet to discuss what happened.  Don't expect much, but it's your best bet at this point.
 
In any case, Autolab will accept these submissions for the rest of the day (though, again, this is not an extension of any kind, and there is no guarantee you will receive any points).  Even so:  submit your work!!!
 
David


Time to submit
Hi all.  The deadline is in 60 minutes.  And no late submissions are accepted.  So...
 
The time has come to wrap up whatever you have and to submit it.
 
Don't risk a slow internet connection, or anything else, getting in your way.
 
Submit now!!!!!
 
David

72 and counting...
Hi all.  72 of you have now submitted your term projects.  And I am really enjoying watching these TP videos.   I am deeply impressed by all the hard work and dedication you have shown, but even more so by the collective quality of your work.  Now let's get those other 280 or so projects submitted and then have some fun tonight!
 
Good luck wrapping up.
 
David

About tonight... (please read)
Hi all.  Some notes about tonight:
 
* Please be on time.  We'll be in McConomy / UC.  Doors close at 8pm.  Room opens early if you want a better seat!
 
* Please bring a pen and a clean piece of 8.5 x 11 paper.  You will be submitting this.
 
* We think tonight is an important opportunity to share with your classmates and also to see what can be done with just one semester's worth of programming.  Some of you may not have gotten your projects to that same level, but I believe that all of you could, with enough time.  So our hope is that you will take some inspiration from this about how much is feasible with the programming training you now have!
 
* In any case, attending counts towards part of your tp3 participation grade.
 
* And in any case it should be good fun!  It always is!  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Optional Lecture + OH Today
Hi all.  Due to a nasty stomach bug, I cannot attend our optional lecture/last-minute-OH sessions today or my own OH today.  Ugh.
 
But don't worry, we are still very much here for you!  The CA's will cover everything (like they always do!).  The optional lectures are available for last-minute OH help.  Plus, from noon to 1:30pm, Jordan will lead OH in the laptop cluster near my office (thanks, Jordan!).
 
I hope you all are happily converging around now!
 
As for tonight, I'll find a way to be there.  Wouldn't miss it.
 
Good luck wrapping things up.

David


Libraries to exclude
Hi all.  Please do not include in your submission any fairly obvious default libraries, such as PyGame, or anything in the Canopy installation.  You should still say which of those modules are required, but do not include them.
 
The modules to include are the odd ones that we could not otherwise easily find and install.  And, even for those, if the files are really large or if they come from a seemingly reputable website, you can just include a link back to that site.
 
But if you have some module you found online, with no easy attribution, but it works, and you need it, then please include it outright (with proper attribution, as best you can) so we can also run your code.
 
Thanks.
 
David

VGA for presentations! (800x600 to be safe)
Hi all.  So you know:  the projector in McConomy is VGA (not HDMI).  We may be able to get 1024x768 resolution, but don't count on it.  To be safe, assume 800x600.
 
So that you can demo in McConomy, as some of you shall, your program should be able to run reasonably well at 800x600 resolution if at all possible.
 
This is a big restriction, yes, so you naturally may also demo outside McConomy for your grading sessions at higher resolutions.  And you also can show parts of your video in McConomy, which presumably you capture at a more suitable resolution for your project.  Even so, it's best if you can demo at a resolution that works for the McConomy projector.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Lost phone is found
The phone that was lost in this morning's lecture is now with me.  I'll have it at my 3pm lecture.  Please stop by to identify and pick it up.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Optional 112 Ideation Small-Group Roundtable Signup Form (due today)
Hi all. This is a follow-on to what we discussed in lecture (well, we did in the morning lecture, which is happening even now, and we will again in the afternoon lecture).

We are always trying to make 15-112 a better experience for you and for our future students. We hope they can learn more, or learn more effectively, or do more with their learning, or just have more fun. Or, best yet, do ALL of these!!!!

We are always looking for the best ideas on how to do this.

True, FCE's are one way to provide feedback. And you can always email me, and you can be 100% certain we will take your feedback to heart.

But... Some ideas, especially the big changes, really require more in-person discussion to flesh out. To that end, I will be hosting some small-group roundtable discussions about how to improve 15-112 in the future.

If you have some really good ideas, and you would like to be part of this entirely-optional discussion, please fill out this form with the times you could be available.

Thanks for everyone who helps make 15-112 even better in the future!!!!

Carpe diem.
 
David

Last Optional Lecture Signup Form
Please fill out this form if you really will attend the last optional lecture of the semester, on Saturday May 10th from 11am to perhaps as late as 3pm (though we may try to end earlier). I will book a room of the right size, and perhaps provide some sort of food or drink for us (though no guarantees!), and so we need to get the headcount right. Thanks!
Should be good fun!  :-)
Carpe diem!

David

Backup your work + Don't change projects!
Hi all.  Another student claims to have lost basically their entire project because they didn't back up anything at all and then accidentally saved over everything.  This is, to say the least, unfortunate.
 
Don't let this be you.  Backup your work.  Lots and lots of times!
 
Also, the same student decided to change projects without discussing it with their mentor.  This is also unfortunate.  We will not grade projects except those that were pre-approved by your mentor.  If you need to change projects, it must be pre-approved.  At this point, of course, there's little chance of that, only because there's little chance that changing projects is in your best interests.
 
in any case, do not change projects without pre-approval.  You will not receive post-approval, and we will not grade that work.  Nobody wants that.  So let's be sure it doesn't happen.
 
Finally:  DON'T PANIC.  Even if things go south over the next couple days, you have done a large amount of really solid work, and you can bank on us finding every point that you have rightly earned.

Carpe diem.

David

Demoing today is not optional!
Hi all.  Some of you have asked if you could skip demoing today, mainly out of concerns that your project is not as far along as some others.
 
First, everyone needs to demo today so they can do user studies.  This is true regardless of the state of your project.
 
Second, though, it is not a problem that some projects are more and some others less complete or sophisticated.  That's how this goes.  We all understand.  Nobody is here to judge you or your project.  That's not the point of today, and that's not what is going to happen.  Instead, the point is for people to help you by suggesting changes you realistically could make in the small time remaining that might improve your project and your grade.  To be useful and practical, such suggestions would naturally take the state of the project into account.
 
In any case, everyone needs to demo today, and everyone needs to be supportive and understanding of the very wide range of projects that we'll see in this process, and then to be sure they provide positive and constructive and practical feedback.
 
It will be fine.  And fun.  And useful!!!
 
See you soon.
 
David

Our work is almost done here...
Hi all.  I've heard great reports from OH:  light loads, short queues, smart questions, etc.  And I see the same on Piazza.  Basically, you as a group are now wrapping up your projects as we would hope, largely independently, and with competence and confidence.  All very good things.
 
And from what I've seen so far, the projects look really nice in general!
 
It is apparent that our work in 15-112 is almost done now, that you are now intermediate programmers, that you are now ready for what lies ahead for you computationally.
 
Even so, we're not quite done yet, so let's be sure to finish strong.  Good luck wrapping up your term projects, and then let's see a fine showing on the final exam.
 
Kudos on the great work so far, and good luck with the rest of it.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David


Tomorrow's lecture
Hi all.  This is a friendly reminder that tomorrow's attendance is factored into your participation/presentation grade for tp3.  And it also gives you the value user-testing you need for other parts of the project, too.  All good stuff.
 
To enable this, everyone please bring your laptop to class tomorrow, even if you do not need a laptop to demo your project (as some of you do not).
 
For those of you who do not have the kind of term project that can be demo'ed on a laptop (say, using a robot that you cannot transport to class), then please bring a video demo if you can.  The demo can be really rough shot from a phone, nothing fancy, just enough to let others give you helpful feedback.
 
For those of you who do not own laptops, please bring your project on a USB drive or post it somewhere accessible online.  Hopefully you can borrow a laptop to demo your work.
 
And for everyone:  we all are trying to help each other tomorrow, so everyone can have even better term projects.  Let's please keep the comments helpful and constructive.  Thanks!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Demo Shortcuts
Hi all.  As we near the finish line, here's a helpful hint:  it's really useful to place demo shortcuts (aka, "cheats") in your project.  This way, you can just press a key to get right to each of the various cool things you want to demo in a short period of time.  This same approach is helpful for debugging, of course.
 
Hope this helps, and I hope you are all happily converging.  We are just over 70 hours from T Time!
 
Carpe diem.

David

tp2 grades released
Hi all.  The tp2 grades and comments are released on Autolab.  The median was a rock solid 90, with fully 44 of you scoring a perfect 100 (woohoo!).  That's great, and holds much promise for next week.
 
That said, some of you received quite low scores on tp2, well below where you would want your final term project grade to land.  If you are in that camp, don't panic, but do react!  This is your clarion call that you need to do more, and quickly, to improve your outcome next week.  You need to follow our advice and work with your mentor to determine where the most points are to be had, and to avoid any and all roadblocks and produce as much working code with as realistic a design as possible from here on out.  Even now, nobody has to fail this term project.  Everyone can pass.  You just need to make good decisions from here on out. And you need to work with your mentor, not for debugging (which is mainly up to you now, though yes we may help a bit here and there as our resources allow), but rather for guidance and strategic planning.  That is definitely your best course of action.
 
Good luck!
 
David

I will have extra OH Monday, 11:30am to 1:30pm
See some of you then!  :-)
 
David

Code from class yesterday (subsetSum and solve24)
Here you go:  subsetSumAndSolve24.py
 
Enjoy!  :-)

David

TP Presentation Event Conflict Form (due tonight)
Hi all.  For those who have a conflict with our TP Presentation Event, on Thu May 1st at 8pm (which is a required course event):
 
Please fill out this form by tonight.
 
For those of you who do fill out the form, I'll review these requests tomorrow and contact you with more details soon.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Great job, so far!
Hi again.  As I peruse some of the tp2 submissions, things are looking very promising.  There is some excellent work, so far.  That said, "so far" are key words.  Much work remains to be done, without much time to do it.  Keep at it.  Continue to focus on where you can get the most return on your precious time investment.  Do not get blocked.  Gracefully re-design your way around blocks.  Or gracelessly trample them.  That works, too.  But whatever you do, don't get blocked.  And if things are not going perfectly, don't get discouraged.  Even then, your best bet by far at this point is to keep going, just do what you can, give us your best project (working or not) so we can give you your best grade.
 
Also, don't forget the polish!  As we approach the finish line, time permitting, add some of the smaller details that people really like.  You'd be amazed how much mileage you can get from a single well-chosen background image.  Or a little bit of background or effect music.  Or a really attractive splash page.  And so on.  These are small things to be added only once the MVP is done, but they definitely add to the user experience.
 
In any case, great job so far, and keep up the great work!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Registration during lecture today
Hi all.  Some of you have registration times assigned during lecture today.  In that case, you may step outside for a few minutes to register for your courses.  Alternatively, you may attend the other lecture today if you prefer.
 
Good luck with your registration!
 
David

Term project weight
Hi all.  To be clear, nothing has changed:  the term project is normally worth 20% of your semester grade.  For AMG purposes, it is worth 30%.

Carpe diem.
 
David

My OH end at 2:15pm today
That's all...  :-)

David

CA's are awesome but not unlimited
Hi again.  So much for the trifecta...
 
Rumor has it that at least one of you is pushing for CA's to give you their cell phone #'s so you can call them directly with your term project questions.
 
Ummm.  No.
 
Our CA's are awesome (they are!).  They are very dedicated, and helpful, and resourceful.  They stay at OH long after they should.  They meet for private tutoring and guidance sessions.  They go the extra mile.  They are there for you.
 
But...  There still is a limit.  They are still CMU students, with their own courses and term projects and exams to worry about.  They have their own clubs and athletics and other pursuits, too.  And even CA's need to sleep and take care of their bodies and minds.
 
So...  We all must respect those limits.  And one of the keys to that is to respect when a CA is off-duty.  If they are not at OH, if they are not wearing a blue hoodie, then please instead find another CA who is on-duty to help you.  And if there is no CA on-duty, then post to Piazza.  Or accept that you have to do your term project mostly on your own, as we have discussed and as should be clear, and try to solve your problem without a CA.  But if you do need a CA, then you still need to use OH or Piazza, and not go out-of-band and contact an off-duty CA directly.
 
Do not ask CA's for their phone numbers, or their personal email addresses, or their facebook id's, or their room numbers, or, or, or...  Let's keep this professional.  That is required on their part, but also on yours.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Don't cheat!
Hi all.  Last of the this morning's trifecta.  As we approach the finish line, history suggests that a very tiny but perhaps non-zero group of you might consider making a very poor decision sometime soon and download what amounts to a complete term project from somewhere (and, yes, there are tons of them out there, a simple Google search away).  Don't do it.  Don't cheat!
 
Yes, some of you may be struggling, and a few of those who are struggling now will in fact submit a sub-par project.  Maybe a C.  Maybe a D.  A few R's even.  But the project is worth only 30% of your semester grade.  And even a totally non-working project, with enough effort, won't get a 0, but more like a 50 or 60 or even more.  So there's maybe more like 10% of your grade on the line. That's a letter grade at the semester.  And that's a lot.  So you have to take this seriously.  But...
 
A letter grade cannot be worth cheating.  It's not.
 
If you do cheat, if you do submit someone else's work as your own, then you will certainly fail the course and face the possibility of serious consequences beyond that.
 
Ugh.
 
This is not in any way meant to be a negative post.  This is not policing.  Instead, it is a positive post, it is urging and coaxing and cajoling you to make the right decision, to Do The Right Thing, to just do your level best and submit your best work and then let the chips fall where they do.

After a spate of cheating incidents recently, let's have a 0% cheating rate this semester on the term projects.  That would be a very nice thing.
 
You CAN do this.  You CAN make a decent term project.  And even if it does not work out the way you hoped, you most assuredly CAN do it the right way, and put in honest effort.  You CAN do it.  And we are rooting for you!!!

Carpe diem.
 
David

Switching Projects at this stage
Hi again.  Please be sure to read this carefully.  Thanks.
 
Some of you are facing obstacles and in something of a panic are asking to change projects at this point.  Of the students who did so yesterday, all but one of them were just fine, and just had to rethink their design a little bit, and perhaps drop a technology without dropping their entire project, to get back on track.  In those cases, it would have been a real shame to throw out a large amount of really good work just because they were temporarily at a roadblock.  Then again, the other student really was unable to make sufficient progress, and really did have to switch projects, so that sometimes happens at this stage.
 
So, consider this:
 
You can (perhaps) switch projects now
If you are truly, really, stuck (or not quite stuck, but basically unable to make sufficient progress), then you can perhaps switch projects now.  And it may be your best bet.  But...

You cannot switch projects without my pre-approval now
Do not simply decide on your own to switch.  This is not allowed, for several good reasons.  If you think you need to switch now, you need to talk to your mentor first, and then if you still wish to switch, then you also need to email me.  Include your reasons for wanting to switch.  We may then need to meet to discuss this.  Note that I may approve some requests, but I will not approve most requests to switch, because in most cases, as noted above, switching is not in your best interests, and a simple small design change can get you back on track.  In any case, switching requires my pre-approval at this stage and from here on out.  No exceptions.

Really, no exceptions!
Do not switch without explicit pre-approval from me, and then hope we will make an exception in your case, as we will not.  Instead, we will grade your original project in that situation, and ignore your non-approved project.  Ugh.  So be sure to follow directions, and see your mentor, and then contact me for pre-approval if you wish to switch projects.

Why?
For one reason, nearly 100% of the cheating cases we see on term projects come from last-minute unapproved changes to new projects (that were of course obtained and not originally created).  Such last-minute changes are a terrible idea (as is cheating, of course), and we will not allow or support such moves.  Of course, we do support you extensively.  So if you think you need to change, just talk to us.  Start with your mentor.  We will help, both technically and with guidance.  We may support the change, we may instead support some other strategy.  But in any case, we'll do our best to help you do your best.  So talk to us.
 
Once again, good luck!
 
David

Don't Panic! And other bits of TP advice...
Hi all.  We are now past that really important weekend, 1 day from the tp2 deadline, and 9 days from the final term project due date.  Of course, this is the homestretch, and it's essential that you make steady progress every day from here on out.
 
If you are not making good progress, first:  Don't Panic.  Really.  It never helps.  Besides, it's also not called for.  Regardless of your tp situation, with calm reasoning and sustained hard work, all of you can still pass at this point, and most of you will still submit a strong project.  Really.
 
Instead, here are some things that you can do to make progress:
 
End-run obstacles (that is, "fix" Polya 3 by changing Polya 1 or 2!)
If you are stuck on something, really stuck so it is devouring hours that you really can't afford, just don't do it. Go around it.  For example, a student recently couldn't get something to work right while a key was being held down.  This is doable, they in theory could have gotten it working.  But in practice, it was blocking them, they were stuck, and precious time was evaporating.  Answer:  change the design.  Instead, start the action on a keypress and end it on a different keypress.  It's not what they wanted.  But it's plenty good enough, and trivial to implement.  A perfect workaround!

Drop technology that you still cannot quite master
We see many students really struggling even now with the modules they've elected to try to use.  This can make huge blocks of time dissolve with literally nothing to show for it.  If you are in this situation, you have to get out of this situation, right now.  Talk to your mentor, today, now, and change your design to not use that module, or at the least, to not use any parts that you cannot easily use at this point.  You have to make real progress now, and you have zero time left to lose to modules you do not quite understand.

Implement Core Features / MVP first
This is key.  Be sure that your time is being spent on "core features" that are absolutely part of your Minimum Viable Product (MVP).  That is, if you did not have that feature, then you do not have a working term project.  Those are the features you should do first.  Don't get caught up perfecting a menubar that really is a nice-to-have, not a must-have.  Do that later.  Don't make your graphics beautiful yet.  Do that later.  Don't add a third or fourth or fifth level.  Do that later (or never).  You get the idea.  Invest all your energies into the smallest set of features that together can be a cogent, working term project.  Only once you have that should you go back to all the other stuff that turns a good term project into a better one.

Finish early
Be sure to be "done" a day or two early, to leave time to work out last-minute kinks, and also to prepare your video and your final submission.  Do not leave that to the last few hours.
 
Nearly all real products in the real world go through some variant of what most of you are now experiencing, some interplay between the design you want and the implementation you have, with a gap between them forced by a lack of sufficient resources to really build what you really want.  So you compromise.  As judiciously and effectively as possible.
 
Good luck with it!  And... Carpe diem!
 
David

backup your work (really!)
Hi all.  Now a third student has lost some of their work.  This time, because their laptop was stolen.  The stolen laptop is obviously a serious bummer (truly), but...  It also is not grounds for an extension, not on a multi-week term project.
 
Hardware fails.  Software fails.  Things fail.  You still need to succeed in the face of all these potential failures.
 
Backup your work.  Don't lose your work.  Back it up.  Regularly.  Religiously.  Reliably.  Redundantly.  Responsibly.  Routinely.  Robustly.
 
"What do a computer hard disk and a gerbil have in common? Their average lifespan is about 3-5 years."  T.E. Ronneberg
 
Backup!!!!!  Now!!!!  And then again, real soon!!!!  And then... again!!!!
 
David
 
tp1 grades and comments available
Hi all.  tp1 grades are now released.  These are worth 10% of your TP grade, so if you didn't get the score you were hoping for, there is still time to right the ship and get the quantity and quality up to where they need to be.
 
I hope you are making great strides on your term projects even as I type this!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Backup, backup, backup!
Hi all.  I posted about this once already, but it is very much worth a second post.  Already, two students have lost large chunks of work (one to hardware failure, the other to accidental file deletion).
 
Please be sure to backup your project every day, even multiple times per day.
 
The easiest way to do this is with Dropbox.  Files there get automatically backed up so that you can access any prior version of them.
 
But you can do this just by saving to any drive that is not on your computer.  It is essential that your backups not be on your computer.
 
And it's best to have multiple backups, at least one complete backup per day.  This way, if you break something in your code and don't notice it for a while, you still have a working copy you can find in your archives.
 
Backups are like seatbelts.  Useless until they save your life.
 
Backup, backup, backup.  Always backup.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Note to 18-100 students
Hi all.  This is just for those of you who are also in 18-100 this semester.
 
First, if you are in 18-100, please email your mentor now so they know about your situation (thanks).
 
Second...  You need to be aware of some rather unfortunate timing on some big deadlines for both courses.
 
Our term project deadline happens to coincide with their last midterm.
 
And our final exam happens to coincide with theirs (same day, different time).
 
This is really sub-optimal, but also really unavoidable.  We can't push our TP deadline back, and we also have zero control over when our final exam is scheduled. They are in the same situation, basically, and cannot move their deadlines either.
 
Your mentor will work with you to help you get as much done as early as possible.  This weekend, really, once again, is especially critical for you.
 
In any case, with deadlines piled up as they are for you, you should spread out the work for both courses as much as possible, and you really have to make excellent use of every single day from now until the final exams. 
 
You can do it, and we are very much here to help.
 
Good luck!

David

Technology deadline and future un-deadline
Hi all.  The technology deadline has passed.  You really cannot lose this weekend to trying to figure out how a module works.  You really have to use this weekend to write large amounts of working code for your project.  Do not lose that opportunity chasing a technology you may or may not ever get working.
 
That said...  Once you complete your project to a safe B level, with your mentor's approval, you may then re-open the technology can.  At that point, you may try to use fun and interesting and even outrageous technologies.  So get your project working, and then add speech or video or 3d graphics or make it web-based or, or, or...
 
Have fun, but for now be really focused on writing original code, and enough to secure a solid grade.  Then go nuts!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

This is a really important weekend!
Hi all.  A review of tp1 submissions shows that many of you have very significant work to do to reach the tp2 milestone, which is basically to have a working program.  For most of you, this weekend is absolutely critical for your term projects.  You need to make great strides now.  Do not put this off.  Do not procrastinate.  You really have to do this now.
 
Yes, it is very nice and sunny outside.  But it will be even nicer in 2 weeks, after the term project deadline.  Go outside then.
 
All semester long I've preached that you should maintain balance, that you should not only work hard, but be sure to eat right, sleep right, exercise, socialize, recreate, and live well.  I said that this is a marathon, not a sprint, and you need to pace yourselves accordingly.
 
That was then, and this is now.  This is the homestretch.  You can see the finish line ahead of you.  You need to focus now on getting everything done and done well and done on time.
 
If ever there was a weekend to devote significant effort to 15-112 studies, this is it.  This weekend, not next weekend.  This weekend. This is the time to push.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Reminder: no extensions on tp2 and tp3 deadlines
Hi all.  Please remember there will be no extensions for any reasons on the tp2 and tp3 deadlines.  Ok, if you are actually in the hospital, then perhaps.  But no extensions will be made for athletic travel, academic travel, routine illness, or other matters that usually warrant extensions on other hw's.  You have lots and lots of time to plan for these deadlines, and they are immutable.  Really.  So please plan accordingly.
 
Good luck with it!

David

Reminder: Recitation today == 50% of quiz10 grade
Hi all.  For those who somehow missed this:  recitation attendance is required this week and next.  Each week's attendance and active participation will count for 50% of your quiz10 grade (quiz10 is not a quiz, really, but it counts as a quiz grade).
 
So please attend.  Besides, today should be good fun!  You'll be solving Takuzu puzzles.  Cool!   :-)
 
David

APT Puzzle Tournament Last-Chance Signups!!!
Hi all.  Please see:  @5052
 
There are a couple slots left for teams to sign up.
 
There will be prizes reserved just for teams with new programmers (that is, YOU).
 
This should be great fun!!!

I really hope some 15-112 teams participate.
 
Go for it!  And have fun!
 
David

The difference between a citation error and plagiarism
Hi all.  To be clear:  you do not have to withdraw tp1 over a few lines of uncited code.  That indeed is a citation error, and you do need to correct it (now, via email, to your mentor!), and you may lose a few points on tp1 for that citation error.  But that's quite different from large-scale plagiarism, where a major chunk of intellectual effort is lifted without citation from another source.
 
"Major chunk" is vague. Because where a citation error crosses the line to plagiarism is itself vague.  But we all know it when we see it.  And you know it if you did it.
 
Let's not go on a witch hunt here, ferreting out every last mis-cited line of code.
 
If you have a blown citation, just let your mentor know.
 
If you plagiarized -- and you do know the difference -- then you really should withdraw tp1 now while you have the chance, and then do your best to do a term project of your own invention in the still-fairly-ample remaining time.
 
I hope this clears things up a bit.
 
David

tp1 anti-plagiarism pass (must read)
Hi all.  So you know:  we will soon begin the anti-plagiarism pass for the original portions of your tp1 submissions.  With each subsequent submission, we invest even more time into the anti-plagiarism passes.  This is to ensure the integrity of the term projects, and the entire course, for you and for all your classmates.
 
If you do not want us to run the anti-plagiarism pass, you can right now this second (and prior to 5pm today in any case) send me an email withdrawing your tp1 submission, and we will do so, no questions asked, no guilt presumed.  In that case, we will not run any anti-plagiarism pass on your code, and you will receive a 0 on that portion, which is worth 10% of your overall tp grade, and thus is worth just 3% of your semester grade.
 
On the other hand, if we do find plagiarism on any term project submissions, violators will fail the course and receive a letter to the Dean of Student Affairs, which may result in additional consequences.
 
Let's all be sure not to plagiarize.
 
David

Cite, cite, cite!!!
Hi all.  It is absolutely essential that you properly cite your sources!  Any time you use any code from anywhere, include a comment above the code indicating where you got it from.  Usually, a URL is good enough.
 
Failure to cite is a major offense.  So...
 
If you use code unmodified, say so.
 
if you modify code a little bit, indicate each modification.  I usually do this with a comment prefaced with my initials, like so:  # DK: changed "blah" to "blech"
 
If you modify code a lot, then say that in your citation.  In that case, you do not need to comment each change (since there are a lot of them).
 
No matter what, if you use code, regardless of how much you modify it, you must cite it.
 
This even applies to tutorials that you use but do not directly include the code, but which strongly influenced your design.  At the top of your file, you must cite even that.  Something like:

# Based in part on this great tutorial:  http://some.tutorial.com
 
When in doubt, cite!
 
Cite, cite, cite.
 
David

Fixed links (Python Libraries, Tkinter demos)
Hi all.  The course website had some broken links (whoops, sorry) to the "Quick Tour of Python Libraries" and also to the "Miscellaneous Tkinter Demos".  Both of these may be of interest/utility to you for your term projects.  These links are no longer broken (you may need to right click and "Reload Frame" to see them).
 
Sorry for the confusion. And enjoy!  :-)

David

Final Exam and Alternate Final Exam Dates
Hi again.  So much planning to do now...  :-)
 
Our Final Exam will be on Monday May 5th, 8:30am-11:30am (sorry about that, we of course had no control over the date or time...).
 
As with midterm exams, students who pre-qualified through Larry Powell's office for extra time on the exam, need to arrange to take the exam directly with Larry Powell's office.
 
Also, here are the official CMU final exam policies:
   http://www.cmu.edu/policies/documents/Exams.htm
 
In particular, check out II.5:  "No student is required to take more than two scheduled examinations that start within a 25-hour period. A student who has more than two examinations scheduled within a 25-hour period or has two examinations scheduled at the same time should first contact the instructors of the courses for assistance in resolving conflicts."
 
In keeping with this, anyone who has *three* (3) or more exams, including the 15-112 exam, within a 25-hour period will qualify to sit for the 15-112 alternate final exam.  Same goes for anyone with another exam at the same time as our exam.  These are the only cases that will be approved for an alternate final exam.
 
The alternate final exam will be on Wednesday 7-May at 8:30am, and in case of another conflict an alternate-alternate final exam will be on Friday 9-May at 8:30am.  Note:  you absolutely may not attend an alternate final exam without explicit prior approval from the course instructor (me) in writing or via email.  You must request this approval prior to 5-May, preferably well before then.  In your request, please include the conflicting courses and the days and times of their final exams.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

TP Deadline + TP Presentation Event
Hi all.  By popular demand, we will go with the new plan as such:
 
The final term project deadline (tp3) is moved to Thursday 1-May at 5pm sharp.  No late submissions accepted, so please try to get it submitted well ahead of the deadline if at all possible.
 
Also: regular lecture on Thu 1-May will be optional (just that day), and replaced by an optional last-minute OH.
 
And:  in lieu of regular lectures that day, we will have a required joint event that night, on Thu 1-May at 8pm in McConomy.  We'll have some fun, maybe a contest or two, and some students will share their projects with the rest of us.  There will be prizes, too.  Should be good fun.  :-)
 
Meanwhile, good luck with your term projects!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David


Please be respectful and honest when making extension requests based on religious observances
Hi all.  Attending a 2-to-4-hour religious ceremony is not a basis for an extension on a long-term assignment, such as tp1.  But if you truly will miss an entire day or more of all your academics due to some religious observance, then you would qualify for a 1-day extension on tp1.  Please do not make an extension request unless you are in this situation.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Lecture and recitation attendance
Hi all.  Even though we are now squarely in term project season, we still have important work to do in lecture and recitation.  In particular, please note that lecture and recitation attendance is still required.  Perhaps starting tomorrow, we will generally include activities in lecture and recitation that will be graded chiefly by participation, with those grades counting in some way (probably towards a quiz score, but that is still tbd).   Also, all the material we cover in lecture and recitation will be fair game for the final exam.  Another good reason to attend!  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

tptemp category in Autolab
Hi again.  Small point but worth a post (I think) to avoid confusion:  when you see "tptemp" in Autolab, this is a temporary category for your tp grades to keep them out of the semester average.  This makes your current semester average somewhat meaningful for now.  Once we enter all the tp3 grades in a few weeks, all the tp0-3 grades will be moved from tptemp to tp, and thus will also count towards your semester grade computation.
 
If none of that made sense, don't worry, you can safely ignore this post.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

midterm2 grades
Hi all.  After a marathon grading session yesterday afternoon and evening and night (thanks, CA's!!!), the midterms are graded.  Woohoo.  The raw median was a respectable 78.  Very little adjustment was needed, but adjusted scores are 1.02*rawScore, then rounded.  Adjusted median is 80.  Top adjusted score is 100.  As usual, adjusted scores are in Autolab now.
 
These scores are solid, but also show that we have some work to do before the final exam to really cement OOP, not to mention recursion, which still lies ahead.  But the scores are indeed solid, and do show that you have learned a great deal over the past 12 weeks (kudos!), and in any case you are collectively ready to do your term projects.  Let's hope!  :-)
 
Graded exams will be returned in recitation on Friday.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Holidays and extensions
Hi again.  Some of you will be observing some upcoming religious holidays.  For most of you, this should not present any difficulty in completing your tp1 deliverable on time.  Some of you, however, may take several days off for religious observance.  If you are in that latter group (and only in that case!), and you need some flexibility with your tp1 deadline, then please work directly with your mentor to arrange an extra day or two as needed.
 
Carpe diem.  And happy holidays!

David

Changing your project (or any other major change)
Hi all.  It is only natural at this point for some of you to change your project plan in some significant way, perhaps even the entire project.
 
That's ok, but only if you do this working with your mentor.
 
You cannot just change topics and inform your mentor.  This is not allowed.
 
Instead, to change projects, you need to discuss the change with your mentor.  Typically, if you've put enough thought into it, this is mostly a quick and easy meeting to keep you focused on moving quickly on your new project.
 
However, if your mentor has sufficient concerns, they may not approve the change.  In this case, you may appeal this to Charlie, and then if he does not approve, you may appeal yet again to me.  Of course, it is likely that Charlie and I would share the same concerns as your mentor, but of course we will also be as fair and open-minded as possible.
 
The point is:  sometimes students get stuck, and rather than tough it out, they elect to basically throw away lots of really good work and start over.  And we can save you from that potentially disastrous decision.
 
In any case: the protocol to change projects is simple:  work with your mentor.
 
Good luck with it!

David

Be more creative in solving your own problems!
Hi all.  Most of the questions we are getting so far are easily answered with Google searches.  Which is what we then direct you to do (in those cases).
 
The time for us to do simple Google searches for you has ended.
 
You are now intermediate programmers, and, well, with all due respect (truly), you have to act like it.
 
You need to show the initiative to do your own Google searches.  If you can't find an answer, maybe find the appropriate place online to post your question.  Most modules have their own online support community.  Find it.  Post your question there.
 
in any case, be resourceful, and answer your own questions.
 
We are still here to help, but the bar is higher now for what you need to do before asking us for help.  You need to show more sophistication and maturity, in keeping with your hard-won and most deserved status as intermediate programmers.
 
You can do it!

Carpe diem.

David


Closed for Carnival
Hi all.  So we're all on the same page:  there is no OH today or tomorrow, and no recitation tomorrow, either.
 
You may have meetings with your mentor, but that would be handled via email directly with your mentor.
 
OH resumes on Saturday.  Charlie will post the revised Term Project OH schedule soon, too.
 
Enjoy Carnival.  Be safe, and have fun.
 
David

Non (or partial) submission of deliverable #0 in autolab
Hi all.  A number of you have emailed me to say that you did not submit all or part of your deliverable #0 in Autolab.
 
Here is the policy for all such cases (deductions will be included in deliverable1, since d0 has no grade in Autolab):
 
* If you submitted everything but your storyboards, but then you did show your storyboards to your mentor at your meeting:  -5
 
* If you submitted everything but your storyboards, but then you did NOT show your storyboards to your mentor at your meeting:  -15
 
* If you did not submit storyboards or competitive analysis, but then you did show both of these to your mentor at your meeting:  -10
 
* If you did not submit storyboards or competitive analysis, but then you did NOT show both of these to your mentor at your meeting:  -25
 
* If you did not submit anything, but you had everything available for your mentor at your meeting:  -15
 
* If you did not submit anything, and then you also did NOT have anything available at your meeting: -50
 
I hope that covers all cases.  If not, then your mentor will interpolate based on these cases and apply them to your situation accordingly.
 
Please be sure to adhere to the policies and deadlines described in the term project document.
 
David

Anyone interested in Kivy for a term project?
Hi again.  Kivy (kivy.org) is a new "open source Python library for rapid development of applications that make use of innovative user interfaces, such as multi-touch apps."  It seemingly allows you to use Python to make seemingly high-quality apps that run on Macs, PCs, but also Android and iOS.  Seemingly.  Some students in past semesters have had some variable success with it.  So I advise approaching with caution.  But it is an enticing if large and complicated option.
 
If you are interested, I suggest exploring a bit.  If after that you are still interested, then please contact me, and also please cc Derek Lengenfelder (andrew id: dlengenf).  Derek is a 112 alum who has taken a special interest in Kivy, and may be of some assistance to you in this regard.  However, please be aware that he is not a CA and so despite his kindness in offering to help, we cannot ask him to invest large amounts of time into this.  But he may help you get past a roadblock or two.
 
If you do use Kivy and you meet some success, please be sure to let me know.  This will be very useful information to provide to future students contemplating their term project options.
 
Thanks, and good luck, and have fun!
 
David

Some hardware for loan for term projects (11:30am pickup today)
Hi all.  I have a limited few pieces of hardware available for short-term loan that some of you can use for term projects:
 
* One Arduino kit (another is already checked out)
* One Raspberry Pi kit (another is already checked out)
* One Kinect
* One Leap Motion
* One Oculus Rift
 
These do not come with any special (or unspecial) support.  You may or may not have any luck even getting them to work with Python.  But the option is yours to try.

They are available first-come, first-served.  I'll be in my office today from 11:30-noon, and you can pickup then, though you should email first to confirm availability.   Otherwise, we may be looking at early next week, which is quite late in the process...
 
Students in the past have made nice term projects with all of these except the Oculus Rift.  The CA's had some trouble making the Oculus Rift work with Python, but apparently one or two students this semester on their own have met some success (point being that the Oculus Rift in particular may be tricky to get working with Python, but still may be possible, your milage may vary, caveat emptor, etc).
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

CA'ing 15-112? Apply today!!!
Hi all.  Now that we are done with the second phase of the course, lots of change is afoot.  For one thing, of course, you all are now done with hw's, quizzes, and midterms (huzzah!), and can focus entirely on term projects.  For another thing, now we have to start planning for the fall semester!  And we have lots of graduating CA's, and a few others moving on to new opportunities.
 
Which means...  Now we have to interview candidates for CA'ing in fall-14.
 
Are you interested?
 
I believe the CA's are the backbone of this course, and they are awesome.  Truly.  And the only way to have an awesome team of CA's is to attract an even larger group of great candidates.  So I very much encourage you to apply if interested.
 
Of course, this is highly competitive.  Historically, about 1-in-5 applicants is accepted.  But those other 4-in-5 candidates also help make this course better.  We really need great candidates!
 
What are the requirements?  None, specifically.  There is no *required* average in this course, though most (nearly all) CA's had super-high averages.  A few were in the mid-to-lower-90's.  And if your average is below the low 90's, then you'll probably first have to take and do really well in 15-122 or 15-150 and then apply to CA 15-112.  However, if you have a low-to-mid-90's average, but you are coming on strong, really learning the material well, and you have a flair for teaching, then you indeed may be an excellent candidate.
 
So if you have, say, a 93 average, but you feel really confident with the material now, and you're a people person, and you love to teach, and you really want to be a CA, then... Apply!  What's the worst that can happen?
 
As for load:  CA'ing takes about 12-13 hours per week every week, but can surge on occasion, say when grading midterms (there is also a hard cap of 20 hours in any given week, and we definitely abide by that).  CA'ing also takes time literally every day, for tutoring, office hours, Piazza, review sessions, staff meetings, grading, mentoring, and more.  And we have a "rapid response culture", so when something needs to be done, we expect it to be done right away.  That 2-minute Piazza response time is no accident.  It's the product of a seriously devoted team.
 
Does this sound attractive to you?  Do you look good in blue hoodies?
 
If so, please let me know.  Today.  The way to apply is simply to send me an email.  Today.
 
Interviews start this week.  Decisions come out as early as next week, maybe the week after.  Like everything else around here, this moves very quickly.
 
I know some of you would make fabulous CA's, and I hope to hear from you today.
 
Thanks.  And... Carpe diem!
 
David

Deliverable 0: More than just a chat!
Hi all.  Some of you have not read the document, and so you are not passing your deliverable 0 meetings.  Ugh.  Let's please rectify this asap.   Read the document!  Carefully!
 
You need to show up with some work done.  You need to do some competitive analysis and some storyboarding.  Read the document for details.
 
Also, deliverable 0 is due tonight at 8pm regardless of when your mentor meeting is this week.
 
Also, you really have to have those meetings soon.  Some of you are out of town (skipping Carnival and using it instead as a second spring break, sigh...).  In that case, waiting until you return is not ok (too long a delay), so instead you'll have to meet via Skype or Google Hangouts.
 
And be sure not to miss your meetings.
 
This is not too much work, and not too difficult work, but it's very important work.  It's Polya 1, and it lays the foundations for your success over the entire term project.
 
Time moves *very* fast from here to the finish line.  Steady progress is vital.

Carpe diem.
 
David

Don't forget to vote in the TP Presentation Poll!
See @6222.  Thanks.
 
David

Awesome work!
Hi all.  As you complete the push for the hw10 deadline, whether tonight's 10pm deadline or tomorrow night's 8pm deadline, I wish to commend you all on your awesome effort and excellent results, not just on hw10, but for the past 3 months.  In a short 12-week span, you have become bona fide intermediate programmers.  This is not to say that you are experts.  You are not.  And an intermediate problem like Dots and Boxes may indeed be quite a challenge for you.  But it's a *doable* challenge.  You *can* do this.  Kudos!!!
 
There is still some work for many of you wrapping up hw10.  And then you really should attend the solution session tomorrow night.  And be certain to get as much sleep as you can to do as well as you can on Tuesday's midterm.
 
And then... Some very hard-earned time off again.  Carnival!  Enjoy!
 
And then...  Get those creative juices flowing, because we'll be in the heart of term projects.
 
For perspective:  The final exam is less than a month away!  This last month disappears in a blink.
 
For now, enjoy knowing that you have collectively moved mountains, even if a couple more lie just ahead.
 
In any case, I know you have, and I applaud you for it  I am moved by your spirit and your ardor and your achievements.  Even while I know the best lies just ahead.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

And... Be respectful!
Hi all.  One more thing:  during times of stress, people sometimes act out a bit, perhaps without intention.
 
Let's all be sure to be respectful of each other.
 
Please understand the CA's are doing all they can, and we are staffing OH as much as we can.  But no amount of staffing and no amount of CA goodwill and hard work would be enough for short queues as we approach the hw deadline.  This is especially true this week, since questions are now much more complicated and require more time to answer.
 
Also, please be considerate of your classmates.  Do not enter your name multiple times in the queue.  Et cetera.
 
We're all in this together.  Let's make the best of it.
 
Carpe diem.

David

hw10: don't panic, just do your best
Hi all.  Some of you are struggling in particular with Dots and Boxes on hw10.  Dealing with an open-ended design is tough.  But of course it is also an essential takeaway from the course.  For now, just do your best.  Give it what time you have, and that's that.  You'll get plenty of partial credit if you tried hard but couldn't get it working.
 
Plus, there is only a 5-point deduction up until 8pm tomorrow night, so that should reduce the stress further.
 
I would also strongly recommend attending a solution session to see how we might solve this problem.
 
in any case, 30+ hours of heroics is not in your best interests.
 
Just give it what time you can, and that will be good enough.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Dots and Boxes idea
Hi all.  For those who are not making any headway on Dots and Boxes, here is an idea you can use or ignore as you wish:
 
You might consider storing each cell, or box, as an instance of a Box class.  So your board would be a 2d list of Box instances.
 
Each Box instance could keep track of whether or not there were walls to the North, South, East, and West (or Up, Down, Left, Right, or however else you wish to think about that).

Each Box instance would also keep track of who owns that box (initially, nobody, but when a player adds the 4th wall to the box, they own it).
 
Now, when you add a line, except on the edges of the board (which belong to only one box), the line will belong to two boxes (right?).  So you need to add the line as appropriate (it's a different edge in each case) to both of those boxes.
 
This is one approach.  One of the simpler ones.  It has the upside of simplicity, and the downside of duplicating work for shared lines (not a big deal, though).  There are many other approaches, too.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Rsvp for Optional/Advanced Talk Tomorrow (by Connor B.) on Arduino + Raspberry Pi
Hi all.  For those of you who may be considering using an Arduino or Raspberry Pi for your term projects, Connor B. has kindly offered to give an optional/advanced talk tomorrow.  Thanks, Connor!!!
 
If you are interested, please email Connor (cbrem@andrew) and list the times you can make it tomorrow.  Connor will post later tonight when he will do it, trying to find the best time (but also understanding there probably will not be any time when everyone can make it (sorry)).
 
Have fun!

David

No optional/advanced lecture today
Hi all.  Sorry I didn't get this organized sooner.  I'll do more optional/advanced material either during the extended break after the midterm or after that, based on your preferences.  I'll poll for those later.  For now, to let you maximize your hw10 and midterm prep time, no optional/advanced lecture today.
 
David

Term Project Mentor assignments
Hi all.  I just sent the mentor assignments to the CA's.  Your mentor should contact you today.  Please let me know by tonight if you have not heard from them.  Thanks.

David
 
PS: I should add that of those who specified a preference, 70% got their first choice and 90% got their first or second choice.  Sorry we could not accommodate everyone (not mathematically possible), but this was a pretty good match.

Class variables and classmethods and hw10
Hi again.  Note that you'll need class variables and classmethods for hw10, if just a tiny part of hw10.  So CA's will briefly review class variables and class methods in recitation today.  But the review will be very brief.  In any case, this means these topics are now fair game for hw's (as in hw10) and midterms and finals -- though I don't think they are too critical, and doubt they'd be worth many points, but they could show up somewhere...
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

My extra OH today (12:30 to 2:30)
See some of you then!  :-)

David


hw10 Q&A
Q: Where do we learn about the reduce function?
A: Python docs.  Or Google.
 
Q: Where do we learn about operator.add?
A: Python docs.  Or Google.
 
Q: Where do we learn about <something else>?
A: Python docs.  Or Google.
 
David

Term Project Mentor Request Form (due tonight! well, by breakfast...)
Hi all.  As we discussed in lecture today, here is the term project mentor request form.
 
Please fill out this form once. It is due by 7am tomorrow (Friday) morning. Mentor assignments will come out later tomorrow morning.
 
Anyone who does not fill out the form by 7am tomorrow will be randomly assigned a (top-notch, world-class, all-round superb) mentor.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw10
Hi all.  Here is the revised hw10 (I'll get the writeup posted by tomorrow, but this is it).
 
This is ALL-SOLO.  Due Sunday at 10pm.  Late deadline at -5 points is Monday at 8pm (not 10pm).
 
1) OOPy Animation from hw9.  [35 pts]
SOLO.  
 
2) Practice Midterms [30 pts]
SOLO. 
 
2a) Do these questions from F13-midterm2: [15 pts]
  1acd, 2cdegh, 5, 6, 7 (include a top-level function runKingsTourEditor)
 
2b) Do these questions from S13-midterm2: [15 pts]
   1ad, 2aef, 4 (functions "g" and "g2"), 6, 7 (include a top-level function runHalfSnake, you may include any portion you wish from snake8.py in your hw10.py file, and edit that code for this problem)
 
3) Dots and Boxes [35 pts]
SOLO.  First, read the Wikipedia page on Dots and Boxes.  Then, write the function runDotsAndBoxes(rows, cols, maxSecondsPerTurn) which will play a human-human Dots and Boxes game on a rows x cols board, but also not allowing more than maxSecondsPerTurn time to elapse on any give turn.  If the time elapses, the screen should visibly flash and the player should lose that turn (though not the game).  Your user interface can be simple, even quite plain, but it must be functional so two people can use it to play.  It must display the board, make clear whose turn it is and where legal moves are, make it easy for players to enter moves, actually make those moves if legal (or reject them if illegal), display who has captured which boxes, alternate turns, display the score, detect game over, and print a suitable game over message.  Don't forget about the maximum time per turn, too!  Your game must extend the Animation class, but otherwise you are free to use or not use OOP in your design.
 
4: Bonus/Optional: Sokoban [up to 5 pts]
SOLO.  First, read the Wikipedia page on Sokoban.  Then, write the function playSokoban() that plays the game.   Do not use any images.  All drawing must be with graphics primitives (lines, rectangles, ovals, etc).   Also, do not use any sound.  Besides that, design as you will.   The nicer the game, the more points awarded.   Have fun!
 
Carpe diem.

David

Change of plan: Recursion not on hw10 or midterm2
Hi all.  After more thought, I think we should accede to the unfriendly calendar this semester, and rather than shoehorn recursion into tomorrow's recitation and a hyper-compressed hw, let's instead push it out past midterm2.  Which we shall.   Don't worry, this will not create more hw for you during term project season.  Instead, we'll cover more recursion in our regular lectures after midterm2 (which are still required!), maybe use some lecture time to do some actual lab-like coding on your part, and then also use recitations (also required) to do recursion labs.  So it will all fit in the lecture+recitation time after midterm2, leaving 100% of your non-lecture-or-recitation 15-112 time to your term projects (as it really has to be).
 
Upshot:  recursion will not be on hw10, and recursion will not be on midterm2.
 
Tonight's review, therefore, will be an additional review of OOP and Functions Redux and Animation based on student interest.
 
Tomorrow's recitation (still required!) will include reviewing solutions to today's quiz and also reviewing solutions to relevant problems from previous midterms.
 
A revised hw10 will be posted soon.  It will include more OOP and animations and midterm prep.
 
This should give you the time to adequately prep for midterm2, and also the time later on to learn recursion at a more reasonable pace, while still letting you have the most time possible for your term projects.  All good things!

Carpe diem.
 
David

Reminder: 10:30am lecture meets in McConomy tomorrow

More Sal Khan talk logistics (including a form due today, and a possible lottery)
Hi all.  As some of you have figured out, our lecture was moved to make way for Sal Khan's talk.  I wish I could attend, but I'll be busy lecturing then.  We can accommodate a small number of 10:30am students moving to 3pm, so they can attend the talk.  But only a small number, due to space limitations in the 3pm lecture, so...
 
This form (due today at 5pm!) is only for students who (1) regularly attend the 10:30am lecture, (2) can attend the 3pm lecture, *and* (3) wish to attend Sal Khan's talk tomorrow. Filling out this form does not mean that you can attend, because we have limited space in the 3pm lecture. So it depends how many sign up. If too many do so, then we may have a lottery to determine who can attend. Look to your email for confirmation later today (Wednesday).
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Thursday 10:30am lecture is in McConomy (UC)
Hi all.  We have been temporarily evicted for just one lecture, this Thursday, just the 10:30am lecture.  We'll meet still at 10:30am but in McConomy in the UC.  This is a one-time deal.
 
The 3pm lecture meets at its normal time and place.

Carpe diem.

David

My OH today (shortened) and tomorrow (extra)
Hi all. Sorry for the late notice but my OH today must be shortened, ending at 1:40pm.
 
To compensate, tomorrow I will have extra OH from 1 to 2:30pm.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw9: Autolab down --> 1-day extension + unlimited submissions
Hi all.  Autolab has been down much of the day, so...  Hw9 is now due *tomorrow* (Tuesday) at 8pm, with the one-day late deadline (with 10-point deduction) of Wednesday at 8pm.  Also, since many of you apparently consumed submissions while it Autolab was limping along, there is no submission limit now.  But please be prudent and do not make dozens of submissions (thanks).
 
Extension or not, the calendar marches on, and the midterm is definitely a week from tomorrow and is not moving, and so...  We will not postpone our scheduled review sessions for this week, and we hope most of you finish hw9 tonight regardless.
 
But this extension seems like the only fair way to deal with Autolab being down for much of today.
 
Sorry for the inconvenience.

Carpe diem.
 
David

Lost Jacket during OH last night
Hi all.  Someone was in OH in Gates last night from around 7pm-10pm and left a white jacket in the back row of the clusters and was wondering if anyone has seen it (ID card should be in the pocket)?
 
If you found this jacket, please let me or a CA know.
 
Thank you!  :)
 
David

hw9 autogader
Hi all. The autograder is posted.  Note that feedback is limited this week.  You will know your score, and if you did not pass a test function you will know which test function, but that's it (not the specific test cases within that test function).  Try it and you'll see what I mean.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

hw9 changes: OOPy game --> hw10, deadline -> Mon 8pm, late penalty -> 10 pts
Hi all.  So word is that many of you are struggling with hw9.  Ok, we'll make some adjustments....
 
* The OOPy game is now part of hw10 instead.  So it will be due next week.  If you've worked hard on it, this just means you're already well into hw10.  Good job.
 
* This means that Polynomial is the only required part of hw9.  The bonus remains the same.
 
* Hw9 is due tomorrow (Monday) at 8pm.  Note the special time.  8pm.
 
* The late penalty for one day is 10 points, and the late deadline is Tuesday at 8pm.  Except for those who already have extensions, no work can be submitted for hw9 after Tuesday at 8pm.
 
* I have maybe 3 or 4 dozen extension requests in my inbox.  In light of these changes, I will not be granting any more extensions to hw9, though these changes should make things more than manageable for everyone.
 
This should relieve the stress.  Even so, it is important that you continue to work on your OOPy games, since there is still recursion in hw10, and no way to extend the hw10 deadline due to the midterm occurring right after that!
 
In any case, I hope this helps.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Reminder: general questions --> OH, not Piazza
Hi all.  Once again, please do not post "I'm stuck" sort of "questions" to Piazza (or, the equivalent "here's my code, what's wrong with it?" posts).  If you basically do not understand how OOP works, or how some key part of OOP works, then you need to head over to OH and get in-person help.  It makes no sense for us to type a lengthy high-level explanation on Piazza that basically just repeats what was said in lecture.  Instead, in that case, you should talk in person with a CA who can try to explain things from a different perspective, and to directly address your confusions and make this make sense to you.
 
Good luck with it.

David

No optional lecture today (next week...)
Hi all.  As the subject line says, the next optional/advanced lecture is next week.  See (some of) you then!

David

hw9: No floats for Polynomial!
Hi all.  You do not have to consider non-integer coefficients for Polynomial.  In general, if you pass the given test cases, and do not hardcode the specific coefficients in those test cases, then you are fine.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Make better use of OH!
Hi all.  A number of you are asking what seem like specific OOP questions, but in reality the issue is a more general lack of understanding of what's really going on with OOP.
 
If you are in the situation, then Piazza is not the right place to go for answers.  Piazza is great for specific answers to specific questions.  But when you don't get a big idea, Piazza is awful.  For that, you need in-person help from a CA.
 
So, for that, please go to OH.
 
Right now, OH is very light.  It *should* be very heavy.  Please go to OH and get the high-level help you need from our awesomely supportive and capable CA's.
 
Good luck with  hw9 regardless.

David

Use the Polynomial class from the class notes!
Hi all.  So there are 3 different Polynomial classes out there:  the one from the 10:30am lecture, the one from the 3pm lecture, and then the one in the class notes.  All are very similar, but subtly different.  It is essential that everyone use the Polynomial version from the class notes for hw9.  Please be sure to do so, lest you face bizarre bugs.
 
Good luck with it.

David

hw9 is posted (and is just as advertised)
Hi all.  No surprises, maybe just a few more details.
 
Have fun!  (really!)
 
And...  Carpe diem!  (really!)

David

Lost notebook (and please do not make public posts here)
Hi all.  Even if you have solid intentions, please do not make public posts here.  If you think you need to make a course-wide announcement, please email me and I'll take care of it as appropriate.

That said...  Did someone find a black note book in the weanHall 7500 or in the GHC lecture hall?
 
If so, please bring it to a CA today and we can return it to its rightful owner.
 
Thanks!
 
David

Second and third cheating cases
Hi all.  I am chagrined to report that we have our second and third cheating cases this semester.  This is very unfortunate for everyone involved.  Students who tried hard in this course for the past 10 weeks made bad decisions in the late hours when facing an imminent hw deadline, and now face much more severe and lasting consequence than if they had simply taken the lower grade.  Dang it.
 
I am posting this, of course, in the hopes that we put a permanent end to this behavior.  It's just really poor judgment.  You may think you are helping someone in such a situation, but you are not.  You are hurting them.  And yourself, of course.  And our tools are really good, so your chances of getting caught are really high.  Sigh...
 
Please abide by the rules.  They are simple and clear and easy to follow.
 
This is not to say that you should be an island.  Very much not!  We provide huge amounts of help for you.  And of course you can and should collaborate with each other wherever it is allowed.  But do so within the rules, and when work is solo, keep it that way.
 
Carpe diem.

David

quiz8 scores messed up in Autolab
Hi all.  For reasons that elude me, Autolab is presently messing up your quiz8 scores as you see them.  They are fine when the CA's and I view them, but are reporting to you are 0's.  Sigh.
 
I have reported this to the Autolab team and I will post back here when they get this resolved.
 
Sorry for the inconvenience.
 
David

Final call for CA reviews
Hi again.  Last call.  Your opinion matters!  Let your voice be heard!  Here is the form.



David

quiz8 grades
Hi all.  Quiz8 is graded and the adjusted grades are entered in Autolab.  The raw median was a so-so 67, and 4 points were added to the adjusted scores, bringing the adjusted median to 71.  Top adjusted score was a perfect 100 (two of them, in fact).  Quizzes will be returned in recitation today.

These same topics are fair game for the upcoming midterm and final, so you are encouraged to study them further.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Installing PyGame on a Mac
Hi all.  Some of you are interested in using PyGame on a Mac.  PyGame installs pretty nicely on a Windows box, but not so much on Macs.  According to one informed source:
 
I think the most common issue is that pygame is 32-bit only.
Mac users should uninstall python and then install the 32 bit version of python:
https://www.python.org/download/
"Python 2.7.6 Mac OS X 32-bit i386/PPC Installer"
and then get pygame from the pygame website, which is a simple dmg with an installer:
http://pygame.org/download.shtml
"pygame-1.9.1release-python.org-32bit-py2.7-macosx10.3.dmg"
Hope this helps!
David


Please fill out the CA review form!!!
Hi all.  Thanks to those who have already filled out the CA review forms.  Very helpful feedback!!!
 
But:  we need more feedback from more of you.
 
Please, it takes just a few seconds, please fill out this form for each of your section CA's and for any other CA's you feel strongly about.

This is invaluable feedback to help us improve this course for you and for future students.

Thanks again, and... Carpe diem!
 
David

Quiz attendance policy
Hi all.  So we're on the same page:  in general, everyone has to take the quiz during their assigned lecture.  In particular, if you sleep through or otherwise miss the 10:30 lecture, you may not take the quiz at the 3pm lecture.  This is definitely not ok and unfair to everyone else who pushed through the morning mental fog to make it to class on time.  Now, we definitely do understand that reasonable conflicts do arise from time to time, and if that happens to you, you should email a request to me before the quiz date.  I will consider such requests on a case-by-case basis (it's not too hard to convince me...).  But simply oversleeping is not an acceptable reason (even though, for sure, I definitely understand that you all work very hard, and that 10:30 is very early in the diurnal cycle of most college students, but it's just a matter of space, and we don't have nearly enough in either lecture to accommodate everyone...).  Thanks for your understanding.

Carpe diem.

David

Optional CA Evaluation Forms (please fill these out today!)
Hi all.  No matter how good we are doing, there is always room for improvement.  And...  So we can better serve you (and future students in future 15-112's), we ask that you please fill out this form to evaluate our CA's.  Please fill out the form once each for each of your CA's in your section, plus once each for any other CA's whom you wish to evaluate.
 
Please also include comments where applicable.  Please keep them constructive.

We very much value your input, and thank you for your time and thoughtful feedback.

Carpe diem.

David

hw9 is all-solo
To be clear:  hw9 is all-solo.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

hw9 pre-release
Hi all.  Hw9 may not be trivial, but it won't be as large as hw8.  Really.  In any case, here is the first part of it.  The second part will be posted by tomorrow.  It's due Sunday at 10pm.  Good luck with it.
 
David
 
-----------
 
"""
Starting from the Polynomial class in the class notes, edit that class and
also implement the Quadratic class so that all the tests below succeed.

Be sure not to hardcode against these tests, as the autograder will use
similar tests, but with different constants.  You may need to study some
of the tests to understand what is going on, and you may well need to
do some of the required reading, and perhaps also some googling, to figure
out how to solve some of these.

You are also responsible for understanding how the tests themselves work.
For example, understand how the list of first-class functions is being used
in testPolynomialAndQuadraticClasses, and also understand why the try/except
calls are used in testQuadraticClass.

Good luck!
"""

def testPolynomialAndQuadraticClasses():
    print "Testing Polynomial and Quadratic classes..."
    for testFn in [testPolynomialBasicsFromClassNotes,
                   testPolynomialEq,
                   testPolynomialStr,
                   testPolynomialRepr,
                   testPolynomialConstructor,
                   testPolynomialInSets,
                   testPolynomialTimesOperator,
                   testPolynomialExponentiationOperator,
                   testQuadraticClass
                  ]:
        print "  Running %s..." % testFn.__name__,
        testFn()
        print "Passed!"
    print "Passed all Polynomial and Quadratic Class tests!"

def almostEqual(d1, d2):
    epsilon = 0.000001
    return abs(d1 - d2) < epsilon

def testPolynomialBasicsFromClassNotes():
    # Commented out the string assertions since we actually
    # changed/improved those as part of this hw
    p1 = Polynomial([2, -3, 5])  # 2x**2 -3x + 5
    #assert(str(p1) == "2*x**2+-3*x**1+5*x**0") # ugly, but functional
    assert(type(p1) == Polynomial)
    assert(p1.degree() == 2)
    assert(p1.coeff(0) == 5)
    assert(p1.coeff(1) == -3)
    assert(p1.coeff(2) == 2)
    assert(p1.evalAt(0) == 5)
    assert(p1.evalAt(2) == 7)
    # Now test the derivative method
    p2 = p1.derivative() # 4x - 3
    #assert(str(p2) == "4*x**1+-3*x**0")
    assert(type(p2) == Polynomial)
    assert(p2.evalAt(2) == 5)
    assert(p2.evalAt(5) == 17)
    # Now test the + operator
    p3 = p1 + p2 # (2x**2 -3x + 5) + (4x - 3) == (2x**2 + x + 2)
    #assert(str(p3) == "2*x**2+1*x**1+2*x**0")
    assert(type(p3) == Polynomial)
    assert(p3.evalAt(2) == 12)
    assert(p3.evalAt(5) == 57)

def testPolynomialEq():
    assert(Polynomial([1,2,3]) == Polynomial([1,2,3]))
    assert(Polynomial([1,2,3]) != Polynomial([1,2,3,0]))
    assert(Polynomial([1,2,3]) != Polynomial([1,2,0,3]))
    assert(Polynomial([1,2,3]) != Polynomial([1,-2,3]))
    assert(Polynomial([1,2,3]) != 42)
    assert(Polynomial([1,2,3]) != "Wahoo!")
    # A polynomial of degree 0 has to equal the same non-Polynomial numeric!
    assert(Polynomial([42]) == 42)

def testPolynomialStr():
    assert(str(Polynomial([1,2,3])) == "x^2 + 2x + 3")
    assert(str(Polynomial([-1,-2,-3])) == "-x^2 - 2x - 3")
    assert(str(Polynomial([42])) == "42")
    assert(str(Polynomial([-42])) == "-42")
    assert(str(Polynomial([0])) == "0")
    assert(str(Polynomial([1,0,-3, 0, 1])) == "x^4 - 3x^2 + 1")
    assert(str(Polynomial([1,0,-3, 0, 1])) == "x^4 - 3x^2 + 1")
    assert(str(Polynomial([-1,0,3, 0, -1])) == "-x^4 + 3x^2 - 1")

def testPolynomialRepr():
    for coeffs in [ [1,2,3], [0], [-1,0,2,0,-3] ]:
        assert(eval(repr(Polynomial(coeffs))) == Polynomial(coeffs))

def testPolynomialConstructor():
    # If the list is empty, treat it the same as [0]
    assert(Polynomial([]) == Polynomial([0]))
    assert(Polynomial([]) != Polynomial([1]))
    # Remove leading 0's
    assert(Polynomial([0,0,0,1,2]) == Polynomial([1,2]))
    assert(Polynomial([0,0,0,1,2]).degree() == 1)
    # Require that the constructor be non-destructive
    coeffs = [0,0,0,1,2]
    assert(Polynomial(coeffs) == Polynomial([1,2]))
    assert(coeffs == [0,0,0,1,2])
    # Require that the constructor also accept tuples of coefficients
    coeffs = (0, 0, 0, 1, 2)
    assert(Polynomial(coeffs) == Polynomial([1,2]))
    # Allow for variable-length arguments.  That is, if the arguments
    # are not a list, then put them in a list
    assert(Polynomial(1,2,3) == Polynomial([1,2,3]))
    # And thus if no values are supplied, this is also the same as [0]:
    assert(Polynomial() == Polynomial([0]))

def testPolynomialInSets():
    s = set()
    assert(Polynomial(1,2,3) not in s)
    s.add(Polynomial(1,2,3))
    assert(Polynomial(1,2,3) in s)
    assert(Polynomial([1,2,3]) in s)
    assert(Polynomial(1,2) not in s)

def testPolynomialTimesOperator():
    # (x**2 + 2)(x**4 + 3x**2) == (x**6 + 5x**4 + 6x**2)
    assert(Polynomial([1,0,2]) * Polynomial([1,0,3,0,0]) ==
           Polynomial([1,0,5,0,6,0,0]))
    # (x**3 - 3x + 5) * 10 == (10x**3 - 30x + 50)
    assert(Polynomial(1,0,-3,5) * 10 == Polynomial(10,0,-30,50))
    # Hint: to do multiplication this way, you have to use __rmul__,
    # which should just call __mul__ (yes, really)
    assert(10 * Polynomial(1,0,-3,5) == Polynomial(10,0,-30,50))

def testPolynomialExponentiationOperator():
    assert(Polynomial(1,2,3)**0 == 1)
    assert(Polynomial(1,2,3)**1 == Polynomial(1,2,3))
    assert(Polynomial(1,2,3)**2 == Polynomial(1,2,3) * Polynomial(1,2,3))
    assert(Polynomial(1,2,3)**3 == Polynomial(1,2,3) * Polynomial(1,2,3) * Polynomial(1,2,3))

def testQuadraticClass():
    q1 = Quadratic(3,2,1)  # 3x^2 + 2x + 1
    assert(type(q1) == Quadratic)
    assert(q1.evalAt(10) == 321)
    assert(isinstance(q1, Quadratic) == isinstance(q1, Polynomial) == True)
    # the determinant is b**2 - 4ac
    assert(q1.determinant() == -8)
    # use the determinant to determine how many real roots (zeroes) exist
    assert(q1.numberOfRealRoots() == 0)
    assert(q1.getRealRoots() == [ ])
    # Once again, with a double root
    q2 = Quadratic(1,-6,9)
    assert(q2.determinant() == 0)
    assert(q2.numberOfRealRoots() == 1)
    [root] = q2.getRealRoots()
    assert(almostEqual(root, 3))
    # And again with two roots
    q3 = Quadratic(1,1,-6)
    assert(q3.determinant() == 25)
    assert(q3.numberOfRealRoots() == 2)
    [root1, root2] = q3.getRealRoots() # smaller one first
    assert(almostEqual(root1, -3) and almostEqual(root2, 2))
    # Now, creating a non-quadratic "Quadratic" is an error
    ok = False # the exception turns this to True!
    try: q = Quadratic(1,2,3,4) # this is cubic, should fail!
    except: ok = True
    assert(ok)
    # one more time, with a line, which is sub-quadratic, so also fails
    ok = False
    try: q = Quadratic([2,3])
    except: ok = True
    assert(ok)
    # And make sure that these methods were defined in the Quadratic class
    # and not in the Polynomial class (we'll just check a couple of them...)
    assert('evalAt' in Polynomial.__dict__)
    assert('evalAt' not in Quadratic.__dict__)
    assert('determinant' in Quadratic.__dict__)
    assert('determinant' not in Polynomial.__dict__)

testPolynomialAndQuadraticClasses()
 

Optional Lecture Reprise Plug
Hi all.  I think this is one of the best optional lectures of the semester.  It's approachable, relatively easy, and really cool, sometimes fascinating.  And we had very light attendance on Sunday (probably due to the day and time, plus the large hw8).  Anyhow, I hope more of you can make it tonight.

Though it definitely remains completely optional!
 
Carpe diem.

David

Tomorrow's quiz redux
Hi all.  In response to more q's on tomorrow's quiz:  it will not cover OOP.  It will cover everything before OOP, through Functions Redux and Animations (including Snake, Tetris, and Shape Invasion).

David

Updated OOP notes and Polynomial.py
Hi all.  I just made a couple small changes (as discussed in class) in the OOP notes, specifically:
 
* Replaced Bernstein's hash function (which we did not cover) with a simple call to the builtin hash function with a tuple of our so-called "hashables" (which we did cover)
 
* Grayed-out the class variable and classmethod section
 
I also added a link at the bottom to our (rather simple) Polynomial.py example.  This is just barely cleaned up from what we did in class. Important note, though:  it includes both the __add__ code from the 10:30 lecture and also the derivative code from the 3:00 lecture.  Everyone is responsible for all of this, not just the part from their lecture!  So look it over carefully!
 
Enjoy!
 
And... Carpe diem!
 
David

Hw8 grading schedule
Hi again.  So due to the hw8 extension, we are out-of-cycle for hw8 grading, which is problematic as our CA resources must then be targeted to quiz prep, quiz grading, recitation, and then supporting hw9.  And so....
 
We'll still get this week's quiz graded and returned by recitation (hopefully), but hw8 will not be graded until later than usual, perhaps by next week.
 
Thanks for your understanding.
 
David

Do not attend a solution session until after you submit hw8
Hi all.  As should be really obvious, once you attend a solution session, you plainly can no longer submit that hw.  'course.
 
So:  even if you signed up for tonight, you'll have to switch to tomorrow night if you plan on submitting after tonight's session.
 
And: we still have some room tonight, so anyone who did submit already is encouraged to attend tonight if they can.
 
Carpe diem.

David

For Thursday's quiz...
I may ask questions about BFS, A*, Grayscale, and Steganography, but seeing as we didn't do much with them, I certainly will not put too much emphasis on them.  You should understand the Big Picture of what they are doing, how they are doing it, and maybe if you had a code snippet understand basic questions about it.  But you will not be asked to reproduce those examples from scratch.
 
David

Bug fix from today's class
Drats.  So the bug at the end of the 10:30am lecture was due to me being a smart-a** and taking variable-length args into the constructor.  Due to that, we stored the coefficients in a TUPLE rather than a list.  So when we added the list of leading 0's right at the end of class, we added a list to a tuple, which Python did not like.
 
The fix was trivial (and fixed while everyone was walking out of class, sigh):  just convert the args tuple into a list.  Here it is:
 
class Polynomial(object):
    def __init__(self, *coeffs):
        # if coeffs == [2,-3,5]:  2x**2-3*x+5
        # @TODO: eliminate leading zero's
        self.coeffs = list(coeffs) #### THIS CALL TO list() IS THE BUG FIX
    
    def degree(self): return len(self.coeffs)-1
    
    def coeff(self, power): return self.coeffs[self.degree()-power]
    
    def evalAt(self, x):
        result = 0
        for power in xrange(self.degree(), -1, -1):
            coeff = self.coeff(power)
            result += coeff*x**power
        return result
    
    def __add__(self, other):
        coeffs1 = self.coeffs
        coeffs2 = other.coeffs
        if (len(coeffs1) > len(coeffs2)): (coeffs1, coeffs2) = (coeffs2, coeffs1)
        # coeffs is shorter
        coeffs1 = [0]*(len(coeffs2)-len(coeffs1)) + coeffs1
        # same length
        coeffs = [coeffs1[i] + coeffs2[i] for i in xrange(len(coeffs1))]
        return Polynomial(*coeffs)

    def __str__(self):
        result = ""
        for power in xrange(self.degree(), -1, -1):
            if (result != ""): result += "+"
            coeff = self.coeff(power)
            result += "%d*x**%d" % (coeff, power)
        return result

def testPolynomialClass():
    print "Testing Polynomial class..."
    p = Polynomial(2, -3, 5)  # 2x**2 -3x + 5
    print p
    assert(p.degree() == 2)
    assert(p.coeff(0) == 5)
    assert(p.coeff(1) == -3)
    assert(p.coeff(2) == 2)
    assert(p.evalAt(0) == 5)
    assert(p.evalAt(2) == 7)
    p2 = Polynomial(10, 0, 0, 1) # 10x**3 + 1
    assert(p2.evalAt(2) == 81)
    p3 = p + p2
    assert(type(p3) == Polynomial)
    print p3  # 10x**3 + 2x**2 -3x + 6
    assert(p3.evalAt(1) == 15)
    print "Passed!"

testPolynomialClass()
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw8 deadline changes, decreased late penalty, and on-time submission bonus
Hi all.  Your great efforts on hw8 (the largest and most complicated hw of the semester) are very much to be commended.  And while it's not practical to extend the already-extended deadline (sorry, but OOP and recursion lie just ahead...), I think your collective hard work warrants some easing of policy.  So here you go:
 
* Hw8 is due at 11pm tonight rather than 10pm (and please understand that with this last-minute change, we may not have very heavy CA coverage for that last hour).
 
* Instead of a 10-point late penalty due by tomorrow night, this is now relaxed so it's 5 points-per-day for late submissions due until Wednesday night (though it's Wednesday night at 8pm, not 11pm, so you can attend the solution session right after that).
 
* So that means you can submit by 11pm tomorrow night at a 5-point deduction, or...
 
* You can submit by 8pm Wednesday night at a 10-point deduction.
 
* Also, to be fair to those who make their final hw8 submission by tonight's 11pm deadline, you'll get a 3-point on-time bonus!  :-)
 
Even with this, I imagine some of you may not finish, even by the late-late deadline.  That's ok.  Just do your best, given what time you have.
 
Good luck with it.  And...  Carpe diem.
 
David

Solution session plan (with Doodle poll)
Hi again.  For your planning purposes:  everyone is more-than-encouraged ((though not technically required) to attend a hw8 solution session this week.  Since we can only accommodate about half of you at any one session, we'll do this twice, and everyone will sign up for the session they will attend.  And, yes, this is optional, if strongly encouraged.
 
The sessions will be Tuesday night 8-10pm and again Wednesday night 8-10pm, both in WEH 7500.
 
I understand some of you may have conflicts both nights.  This is why this is optional.  If you are in that boat, please arrange for someone else in your study group to attend, and then to carefully review the material with them soon afterwards.
 
The sessions will review solutions to Tetris and Shape Invasion.  They will also spend some time after that reviewing the rest of this week's quiz material (note that there is no separate quiz prep this week, it is part of this hw-review-and-quiz-prep session).  But the focus will be on Tetris and especially on Shape Invasion.
 
To reserve your spot on Tuesday or Wednesday night, please fill out this Doodle poll.  It is first-come, first-served, and once a day fills up, it will be unavailable (since it will be full, after all).
 
Also, if you do reserve a spot, please be sure to actually show up!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Just do your best!
Hi again.  Last platitude du jour.  Some of you are done with hw8 (kudos!), but many are not.  Some may not finish entirely.  That's ok.  Just do your best, with what time you can reasonably allot to it.  Then, attend the solution session, to cement your understanding.  Even if you "solved" these problems, there is a very good chance the CA's can help you see a clearer, cleaner way to go about it.
 
The primary goal is not to finish hw8.  The primary goal is not to get a good grade on hw8.  The primary goal is to learn this material well.  If you do that, you will be very well-served for your future coding needs.  And you will be ready to create a wonderful term project.  And you will likely get a good grade in the course (regardless of hw8).
 
This is not to say grades do not matter.  They do, at some level.  But learning matters more.  As does living a balanced life.  So don't stay up to 6am night after night pushing yourself beyond your limits.  Give it the ol' college effort.  Give it what you can.  But that's all.
 
Of course, when you are resource-constrained -- and you are! -- then it is vital that you use your resources wisely.  This includes your own time.  Invest it wisely.  Bypassing Polya steps 1 and 2 to burn hour after frustrating hour on Polya step 3 is not a good use of your time.  Similarly, failing to collaborate on Snake and Tetris, and thus spending many more hours than necessary learning that material, is again not a good use of your time.  Use your time wisely!
 
And use our time wisely, too.  The queue is always smallest on Wednesdays and Thursdays, and growing on Fridays into Saturdays, and then very long on Sundays (and Mondays when the hw deadline is shifted, such as this week).  Knowing this, get into the queue earlier in the week, if at all possible!  It's way, way more efficient.
 
It's not a matter of you not having time.  It's the same time you are investing, but only a question of when you are investing it.  Earlier is better, nearly always.
 
Anyhow, bottom line: perfection is not required.  Only your honest effort is required.
 
Do your best, learn as much as you can, and that is enough.  It has to be.  And it is.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Polya matters!
Hi again.  With Shape Invasion, the biggest problem does not seem to be MVC violations so much as Polya violations.  Some (ok, many) people are diving in to step 3 without having really considered steps 1 and 2.  And as a result, some (ok, many) have written code that "works" (in that it displays the shapes correctly) only to discover they can't get it to "completely work" (in particular, they can't swap shapes, or at least not easily).
 
There is a simple, short, clear way to code this.  Actually, there are many such ways.  So if your approach is turning out not to be simple, clear, and short, then somewhat definitionally you've taken a less-than-ideal approach.
 
Take the time to reason through one such solution before writing any code.  And if you've written tons of code, but you designed yourself into a corner, even now it's best to dispose that code and start over.  Yes, sometimes the best way forward is to go back to the beginning.  You'll get to reuse lots of code, so you aren't really starting anew.  But you'll get a chance to design it properly, and save yourself lots of misery trying to force a bad design into a somewhat-working solution.
 
As for a good design:  there are numerous ways to store the shapes on the bottom row.  Maybe as a list of shape names.  Or maybe as a list of the number of sides (here you might just use 0 to represent the circle).  Or many other ways.
 
Hardcoding is not a good way.  Hardcoding is never a good way.  So if you have, say, separate logic for swapping a square and a triangle from, say, swapping a hexagon and a pentagon, then surely you have not designed this properly.
 
If you are unsure of how to design this properly, then:  STOP.  Do not just forge ahead without a good design.  Unfortunately, design questions are not well suited for Piazza.  But you can head over to OH and discuss your design with a CA.  A 5-minute discussion might save you hours and hours of headache.
 
In any case, Polya definitely matters.  Be sure you have a good design before committing your precious time into implementing that design.
 
Restated: "Our goals can only be reached through a vehicle of a plan, in which we must fervently believe, and upon which we must vigorously act. There is no other route to success."
Pablo Picasso
 
Or:  "To achieve great things, two things are needed; a plan, and not quite enough time"
Leonard Bernstein
 
Or:  "Being busy does not always mean real work. The object of all work is production or accomplishment and to either of these ends there must be forethought, system, planning, intelligence, and honest purpose, as well as perspiration. Seeming to do is not doing."
Thomas A. Edison
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

MVC matters!
Hi all.  Many errors in Snake and especially Tetris are due to violations of MVC.  Remember:
 
* Do not draw anything ever except in redrawAll (and its helper functions)
 
And
 
* Do not modify anything ever in canvas.data.* from redrawAll (or its helper functions)
 
There are more rules, but those are the ones people are violating the most.  And each time you violate one of those rules, you generally produce a hard-to-find and hard-to-fix bug.  Ugh.
 
Hope this helps.
 
David

Optional lecture, *now*, DH 1112
Hi all.  We're getting started any minute now.
 
Good seats are still available!  :-)
 
David

APT Puzzle Tournament (Apr 19th, register by Apr 14th)
Hi all.   Margaret Schervish, former 15-112 Head CA, recently graduated and now works at APT (Applied Predictive Technologies), and she is working with APT to create some fun and productive opportunities for CMU students, including 15-112 students (cool!).
 
Among those is the upcoming APT Puzzle Tournament (more info here:  APT_Puzzle_Tournament.pdf).
 
This will be on April 19th, with a registration deadline of April 14th.
 
It is for teams of up to 3 students, and 15-112 students are definitely invited!
 
I hope some of you participate.  It should be a good challenge and great fun!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Pause/disable timer for better debugging
Hi all.  Many of the quesetions we are seeing relate to students struggling to see exactly when a bug occurs, due to the ongoing animation, and in particular due to timerFired events.
 
So, as we discussed:  stop them.  Pause the timer or just disable it entirely.  Then, make it so when you press, say, 't', one timerFired event is simulated.
 
This gives you fine-grained control over time, so you can narrow down bugs.
 
It also lets you test things in ways that could not otherwise be tested.
 
For example, when doing piece rotation in Tetris, a fine test is to turn off the timer and then rotate over and over again.  If done correctly, the piece will rotate in place.  A common error, however, results in the piece "walking" across the screen in this scenario.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Hw8 is due Monday at 10pm
Hi all.  Some of you seem to have missed this, so here it is again:  hw8 (the current hw) is due Monday at 10pm.  Also, the late deduction is 10 points up to Tuesday at 10pm.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Optional/Advanced lecture, Sunday, noon to 2pm, DH 1112
Hi all.  This week's optional/advanced lecture will be Sunday (unusual day), noon to 2pm (unusual time), in DH 1112 (unusual location).
 
We'll cover "How a Computer Works", which starts from simple logic gates and works through how to construct the basics of a modern digital computer.   It's basically a lightweight Intro to ECE in 2 hours.  It's relatively easy and fun and interesting, I think.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.

David

Optional review sessions tomorrow, 1:30-3:30pm, WEH 7500
Hi all.  The following 4 optional review sessions will be offered back-to-back in WEH 7500 tomorrow (Saturday):
 
1:30-2:00: BFS and A*
2:00-2:30: Grayscale and Steganography
2:30-3:00: Functions Redux
3:00-3:30: Snake walkthrough
Note that all this stuff will be on the next quiz, or at least could be...
Enjoy!  :-)

David


A case study in following your passion
Hi all.  This story (including current and former 15-112 students!) is a nice example of what I mean by following your passion.  They may not cure cancer (probably not), they may not win a race (though let's hope they do!), but they are pursuing their passion in a real, tangible, and serious way.  That's when great things happen!
 
May you be inspired by this and the many other examples we've discussed this semester, and find what floats your karmic boat.  For some of you, that will take you down the road of charitable work.  For others, doing some crazy engineering.  For yet others, creating some amazing art or music or dance or drama or literature or philosophy or, or, or....  And so it goes.  Find your thing.  And do it!  For real!  With other like-minded souls!  With high standards!  With passion!!!!


David

hw8 hints: close a window, draw a star
Hi all.  Here are a couple of hints for hw8:
 
You can close a window with root.destroy().  And you can draw a star like so:
  http://www.kosbie.net/cmu/fall-11/15-112/handouts/drawStar.py
 
Today in recitation maybe your CA can spend a minute quickly explaining how drawStar works.  Or not.  As intermediate programmers, this link should be plenty enough to get you going.
 
Good luck with it!
 
And.... Carpe diem.
 
David

Quiz7 grades
Hi all.  The CA's maintained their perfect same-day quiz grading record (wow!), and....  The results are, collectively, rock solid.  The median was a very strong 85, with over two dozen scores of 100 or higher (top score was 105).  Great job!
 
Scores are in Autolab.  Quizzes will be returned in recitation today.
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

Tkinter references (optional, interesting)
Hi all.  This is optional, so you can safely ignore this post if you wish.
 
While Tkinter is not the most modern graphics package, it actually is far more complete than we have suggested.  You could use it to write a fairly rich and complete application, including windows, menus, buttons, comboboxes, text input, scrollbars, layout manager, popup dialogs, and so on.
 
Plus, even if you just stick with a single window containing a single canvas, like we do now, there are lots of helpful methods you could use to do things like resize the window (or tell if it is resized), iconify it, set its icon, bring it to the front (of the other Tkinter windows), fix its aspect ratio, make it non-resizable, and so on.
 
If you are interested, you could learn more about these from one or both of these Tkinter references:
 
   * http://effbot.org/tkinterbook/tkinter-index.htm
 
Or:
 
   * http://infohost.nmt.edu/tcc/help/pubs/tkinter/web/index.html
 
There may well be other good ones out in the wilds, too.
 
Enjoy.  And carpe diem!
 
David

Can't see hw8? Try reload-frame
Hi all.  A number of students have reported that they cannot see hw8 in the schedule despite reloading the page.  The website uses the now-antiquated HTML technique of frames.  And sometimes, especially in Chrome and especially on Macs, but sometimes in other browsers on other os's, you have to instead use reload-frame.
 
So:  If you cannot see hw8 in the schedule:  try right-clicking in the schedule, and select reloadFrame.
 
That should do it.

Carpe diem.
 
David

hw8 Shape Invasion hint
Hi all.  Here's a handy-dandy hint for hw8 for you:  notice that all the falling shapes are always at the same vertical position as each other.  That has implications for how you can more simply implement your model.  How?  Hmmmm.....  :-)
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

My OH tomorrow
Hi all.  Sorry, but I have to have shorter-than-usual OH tomorrow, from noon to 1:30pm.
 
David

hw8 is posted
Hi all.  Hw8 is now posted.  Some notes:
 
* You really need to do the Snake tutorial carefully.  Also, you may not just submit the code from the snake8.py file we provide, but instead must submit the one you created yourself.  Of course, it will be extremely similar.  The big difference:  you will have written yours.
 
* You may do Snake and Tetris collaboratively with 1 other student, if you prefer.  Even so, you may not jointly submit one piece of code, and you may not copy any code at all from each other.  You must write your own code.  You can help each other with high-level designs, and you can also help each other debug.  So your code will be very similar, most likely.  But you cannot just write it once together and then copy that code into the other student's submission.  No copying, even when collaborating.
 
* Your Shape Invasion code must be entirely solo. Same with the bonus.
 
Have fun!
 
David

"What is a closure?" --> OH (not Piazza)
Hi all.  Some of you are unsure about what closures are or how to use them.  Specific questions are great for Piazza.  But the "what is xxxx" or "I don't get yyyy" type questions are really ill-suited for this format.  So please do not post those questions here.  Those more open-ended questions require in-person assistance.  So if you have such a question, please head over to OH, where our super CA's are ready and zealously willing to help you.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Tomorrow's quiz addendum: Sssssnake
Hi again.  In response to some inquiries:  while you all should definitely be studying Snake now, it will not be on tomorrow's quiz.  It will technically be part of this week's hw, and so will be covered on next week's quiz.
 
But knowing how to write Snake from first principles, easily, is of high value.  The Snake and Tetris case studies together capture what you need to know about animations.  Well, almost entirely -- neither uses mouse presses, and both are grid-based, so it would also be good to know one more case study that is pixel-based (rather than grid-based) and used the mouse, such as missile command (which was covered in last night's optional review session).

Carpe diem.
 
David

Tomorrow's quiz
Hi all.  As I noted yesterday in class, we will have a quiz tomorrow, and it will cover everything from the last 2 lectures.  This is unusual, having a quiz prior to a hw on the material, which is why I am reposting the policy here.  To prepare, you should be able to write any of the event examples from scratch, or any reasonable variant of them, including the ones with and without globals (so you also should understand closures).  This definitely includes the code in the run function, written from scratch.
 
Do not memorize the code.  That would be time wasting and useless.  Instead, be sure to understand the code.  If you understand what each line is doing and why it is doing it, then come quiz time the code should basically write itself.  Really.
 
The way to practice?  Easy.  Just write, say, events-example1.py from scratch, repeatedly, until you can do it easily.  Then, move on to events-example3.py, until you can do that easily.  Finally, don't neglect the without-globals version.
 
What's a "reasonable variant"?  Here's one, for example:  write an animation where  a box repeatedly bounces back and forth vertically from the top to the bottom, in the horizontal middle of the window.  Each time the user clicks in the box, it changes color.  But if a click is outside the box, the movement stops and "Game Over" is displayed.
 
You can dream up an infinity of such reasonable variants!  So there's endless opportunity to practice!  :-)
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Here we go!
Hi folks.  I hope you all enjoyed a satisfying and energizing spring break!  As of now, though, spring break is over, and we are back in full swing!
 
The next 3 weeks are very busy.  Not only are we covering 3 important and fun but challenging intermediate topics (animation, classes, and recursion), but we also have to get ready for our second midterm, which is 3 weeks from tomorrow.  Besides those 3 topics, it is essential that you use that time to review and thoroughly master the material from the first 8 weeks.  All that material will appear on the second midterm, as well as the final, and pretty much any future CS course or coding task that you will face.
 
So now is the time to walk and chew gum at the same time, by studying the new material even as you continue to review the older material.  You can do it!  And, as always, we are here to help!
 
And for those who are so inclined, you may also consider the third parallel task of your term project.  You certainly may leave this until after the second midterm.  But some projects require more time than just the last few weeks of the semester.  And those projects therefore require that you get going in earnest about now.  Also, even for those who do wait (which again is not a problem), it's a very good idea to at least work through the "blue sky" part of the early-Poly-step-1 process, and show up with some clear ideas about what you might want to do.
 
In any case:  we start today.  Now, in fact.  So let's put spring break behind us and hit the ground running.
 
Good luck!  And carpe diem!
 
David

Optional animation tutoring 7pm today and 4pm tomorrow
Hi all.  We are still on spring break, but I have to break the Piazza radio silence for this one optional announcement.
 
In response to your requests, we will offer optional tutoring covering last Thursday's animation lecture.  Remember that everyone should show up to class this Tuesday already understanding how to write all of events-example1.py from scratch, and comfortable with the ideas of event-based programming, and the model-view-controller paradigm.  Some of you may well benefit from some optional tutoring in this regard.  To that end...
 
Joel will host today's optional tutoring session at 7pm.
 
Mark will host tomorrow's optional tutoring session at 4pm.
 
Figuring that GHC will be nearly empty, let's just plan for folks to meet at the 5th floor clusters.
 
Enjoy the rest of your break!

And... Carpe diem!

David

while (isSpringBreak() == True): sleep()
Hi all.  This is the last post until a week from tomorrow.
 
As of now, the course is officially on spring break.  So:  no Piazza, no CA emails, no office hours, etc.  The one contact still operating is my email.  If you need something course-related during this week, please email me directly.  Or you can of course wait until after spring break.  :-)
 
Meanwhile:  I hope you all have a great spring break.  Rest up.  Have fun.  Relax.  Enjoy.
 
We'll hit the ground running when you return.  Be sure to come back ready for that!
 
Carpe diem!
 
David

Midsemester grades
Hi all.  I just entered midsemester grades.  They should show up in SIO soon.
 
The median is around 85, which is very solid.
 
Of course, we still have 2/3rds of the points ahead of us, but you are off to a great start!
 
Kudos!
 
David

opencv tutorials
Hi again.  We've received some requests for materials on opencv (for those interested in perhaps using a webcam or video analysis as part of their term project).  Of course, you can and should Google this to find some resources.
 
But here is a fine place to start -- some examples cobbled together by a 112 CA:

http://cbarker.net/opencv/
 
You'll have to make some minor edits to make it work.  But this should get you off and running.
 
Also, of course, there are the official OpenCV Python Tutorials:
 
http://docs.opencv.org/trunk/doc/py_tutorials/py_tutorials.html
 
Hope this helps!

Midterm1 grades: Don't Panic! But do fix it!
Hi all.  As has become a tradition on this day after midterm1 grades are posted, my inbox greeted me with a number of sincere and serious concerns about how some students are doing in this course.  Even though everyone did reasonably well as a group, that's a population statistic, and you are really individuals.  Some of you did not do well, and some did quite poorly.  What to say to them?  Maybe to you?
 
First, don't panic.  Everything is ok.  This is fixable.  Really.  And second, let's fix it.
 
1. Don't Panic
 
As far as points go, there was less on the line than it may have seemed.  The two midterms are jointly worth 20%, but your lower score is half-weighted.  Assuming this is your lower score (let's hope), then this is worth just under 7% of your semester grade.  We've also done around 70% of hw's and quizzes, which are worth 30% and 10% respectively, so that's another 70%*40%, or 28% of points.  That means we've covered just around ONE-THIRD of all the points so far this semester.
 
And that means:  fully two-thirds of the points lie ahead of you.
 
Let that sink in.  No matter how well or poorly you have done so far, you have not made a major dent yet in your semester grade.  There is ample time, and there are ample points, ahead of us to make a major change for the better (or, yes, for the worse, but that rarely happens).
 
Also, consider these trends:  while most students do score around the same adjusted score on the second midterm, they also in general get higher scores on the final exam.  And... nearly everyone improves their grade with their term project.  So not only are 2/3rds of the points still on the table, but for most of you, those points will drive up your semester grade.  Plus, for sure, this effect is most pronounced for the most struggling students.
 
To put it in more specific terms:  right now, we have 20 students with failing grades.  By semester's end, of those 20, history suggests 15 or more will pass.  So not everyone passes (sorry), but most do, even among those who are currently failing.  And the same goes at other bubbles.  Among students who now have a C+, the median semester grade will likely be a B-.  And since CMU does not use +/-'s, that's a B.  Cool.
 
And there's also still AMG.  You cannot use AMG to get an A or a B, which must be done the old-fashioned way.  Rather, AMG is a safety net to avoid a D or an R.  And it works.  Probably 2-3 dozen of you will obtain a C at the semester this way.  So long as you stay in the game, trying hard, and over time improving.  Good to know.
 
To conclude this part, ok, you may have botched midterm1, but even so, despite the calendar saying we are halfway done, the point system says we have 2/3rds of the way to go, and history says you will probably improve your grade over that stretch.  So:  don't panic!
 
2.  Let's fix it!
 
The first thing to do is:  nothing!  Take a break for a few days.  If you need it, take the whole of spring break off.  It is a break, after all.  Get away from the intensity of CMU, especially the stresses of midterm week.  Relax.  Decompress.  You need it, and you sure earned it.
 
Once decompressed, though, then: dive back in.  Full force.  Con gusto.  The way to fix this is chiefly by practice.  For example, each of the 3 free responses on the midterm were very closely related to hw problems, practice problems, or case studies that were readily available to you to prep.  However, it's not enough to look at those problems, or their solutions.  You have to DO them.  Starting from a blank editor.  And quickly.  You have to push yourself to move quickly, think quickly, improve your fluency with this material.  And then you have to check your work (unchecked work is not of much use), find your errors, understand them, and fix them.  Then, if there were errors, you should double back sometime soon after and do the whole thing again. And again.  And again.  Until you have it down pat.  Not memorized, of course, but understood.  So you can write any of those functions (or any close variants, as may appear on an exam) quickly, easily, from first principles.
 
Do that for all the case studies, all the problems from the hw's and quizzes, and then also some of the practice problems.  And if you do that, if you master all those problems and have all that readily at your disposal during the exam, then your exam scores will certainly go up.  They will.  As will your long-term understanding of this material.  Which means your huge investment of time and energy into this course will be useful to you beyond the end of this semester, in future courses, in future job interviews, and in your future career.  And that is worth much more than a better grade this semester (though a better grade would be nice, too!).
 
Of course, you are not alone.  Let's put the "let's" in "Let's fix it!".  We are here to help you.  We are.  Really.  Ask questions on Piazza, go to CA OH, go to my OH, get tutoring from your CA's.  Use the resources we provide to you.  And use every other resource wisely, too.  Go to Academic Development for tutoring, get in a productive study group (one that meets regularly, and actually, really studies, as a group).
 
Now, where does the time come from for all this?  For some of you, you just need to make more time, make this a higher priority.  This is because some of you are not investing enough time, and by now you have ample data to prove that that approach will not work.  So fix it.  Spend more time on task.  It's that simple.
 
Only it's not that simple for most of you, since most of you with low scores are indeed investing lots of time.  Too much time in some cases.  Yet fixing this seemingly requires even more time.  How does that work?
 
Here, it's a matter of trust, I suppose.  Trust that by changing where and how you invest your time, you will eventually spend about the same amount of overall time and yet you will achieve much better results.  If you invest more energy into really, truly learning the material, then yes, you will necessarily have less time for hw.  But you'll also need less time for hw.  Think about that.  It's the central point here.
 
Spend more time upfront learning the material. Spend less time on hw.  Get about the same good results on hw, but get much, much better results on exams, in job interviews, and for the rest of your life.  It's an easy decision.
 
But it requires change.  Change of attitude, rethinking the importance of grades versus learning.  Rethinking the myth that just trying harder can fix this.  Rethinking the myth that working and suffering alone is somehow stoic or heroic or anything but lonely and ineffective.  Rethinking your resistance to embracing a path that has worked so well for so many of your peers who have been in your situation. And also change of behavior, embracing all those changes in attitude, and turning them into changes in behavior.  Not just thinking that, or believing it, but doing something about it.  Every day.  Every single day.  Try to be the change you want in the world.  And start at home.  Try to be the change you want in yourself.  Every day.
 
You can do this.  You totally can do this.  And we are here to help.  Let's get this going.  Ok, actually, let's not.  Let's take a well-earned and much-needed break.  And then, re-energized, let's not panic, but let's be calm, and rational, utterly devoted to your success, and then let's dive in and get this fixed.
 
Carpe diem.

David
 
Returning graded midterm1's
Hi all.  Please note that due to exam conflicts, medical issues, extended-time arrangements, etc, there still remain a small group of students who have not yet taken the midterm exam.  For this reason, naturally we cannot yet return graded exams.  Hence, we will have to do that after spring break.
 
Actually...  For those who are around and are so inclined, you may stop by my office tomorrow (Friday) at 7:30pm.  We'll be grading the last few midterms then, so I can return your graded midterm at that time, but not earlier, nor later, since once the exams are graded, I'll also head home for a while.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Midterm grades
Hi all.  Thanks to the incredible efforts of our awesome CA's, the midterms are now graded!
 
And....  The results are very solid!  The raw median was 73.5, which is 2.5 points higher than s13's midterm1.  While this may be slightly an apples-and-oranges comparison, it definitely is a good sign.  Nice job!  In any case, every grade was adjusted by 6.5 points (and, as usual, autolab has the adjusted scores) bringing the adjusted median to an even 80.  Solid!

The top overall adjusted score was a stunning 112 (how fitting for this course!).  And fully 19 of you have an adjusted score of 100 or higher.  Fabulous!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Code for Canopy testing (you may ignore this)
Hi all.  This is for students at the optional lecture.  Everyone else should not run this code or else horrible, terrible, unspeakable things will happen.  Maybe.  Ok, maybe not.
 
David
Optional lecture tonight, 8:30pm (please read prep instructions first)
Hi all.  The optional lecture is tonight at 8:30pm in WEH 7500.  The room is large for our needs, but we'll manage.  Please sit at the front near the lectern (thanks).
 
I'm undecided as yet between a few possible topics/activities, but one of them in particular may require that you do some participation during lecture.  In preparation for that possibility, if you plan to attend tonight, please install Enthought Canopy with the Academic License first, and then bring your laptop tonight.
 
To do this:
1) Request Academic License
Go here (https://www.enthought.com/store/), then click on the Request License link at the bottom left.  So long as you use your CMU email address, this will be quickly approved.
 
2) Install from Full Installer
Get that here (https://www.enthought.com/downloads/).
 
3) Add opencv
Run Canopy, go to the Package Manager, in the search bar at the left top, enter "opencv", select the opencv package that shows up on the right, and select "install".
 
That's it!  The rest we'll do tonight (if we go down this path).
 
See some of you soon.
 
David

Optional lecture poll (please reply by noon today if interested)
Hi all.  It's unclear we can get a large enough room for today's optional lecture, so we may have it either at 4:30pm or at 8:30pm.  To that end, if you are interested in attending, can you please fill out this poll by noon today?  Thanks.
David

Please do not take exams in red pen!
Hi all.  For obvious reasons, that complicates our grading.
 
fwiw, we've nearly finished 4 of 7 questions.  Of course, the last 3 are the more complicated ones...  We'll probably have to stop later tonight and then wrap it up tomorrow night.  I'll post here when we are done and grades are ready, of course.
 
Also:  so far, so good.  :-)
 
David

Late OH start today
Hi all.  I apologize for the late OH start this evening.  I was unavoidably detained....
 
Anyone who waited this evening and left can email me and we'll schedule a private meeting, hopefully late tomorrow morning if that works for you.
 
Sorry again for the inconvenience.
 
David

Extra OH tonight, 6:30-7:30pm
Hi all. I'll have another extra hour of OH tonight from 6:30pm to 7:30pm.  See some of you then.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Lost phone in this morning's lecture
Hi all.  Someone left a phone at this morning's exam.  If it is yours, you can claim it at my OH from 1:30 - 2:45 today.
 
David

Good luck!
Hi again.  Of course, luck favors a prepared mind (think about it), and you have very prepared minds.  So you are bound to be lucky!!!  May it be so.
 
Good luck today.  Try hard.  Stay focused.  Do your best.
 
And...  Carpe diem!
 
David

Take the exam at your assigned lecture
Hi all.  Unfortunately, we are seriously space-constrained, so unless you have an email confirmation from me or from Larry Powell's office indicating otherwise, then you must take the exam today at your assigned lecture.
 
David

My OH this week
Hi all.  As per @4585, CA's have no more OH this week (saving time for grading midterms), but I do have OH at the following times:
 
Tue: 1:30pm - 3pm (note the late start)
Wed: 1:30pm - 3:30pm (wahoo, extra Wednesday hours!)
Thu: noon to 2:45pm (normal)
Fri: We'll see...

Carpe diem.  And good luck on the midterm!
 
David

Don't stay up too late!
Hi all.  I'm an early bird (we get up at 4:45am each morning), so I'm turning into a semi-conscious pumpkin now.  Before I'm fully catatonic, I figured I'd post this and remind you all not to stay up too late tonight.  Now, in fact, is a fine time to stop studying.
 
Easily, by far, the quickest way to ruin 8 weeks of hard work, and to make your midterm grade plummet, is simply to stay up too late tonight.
 
It's impossible to believe that after 8 weeks of hard work, that somehow just a few more hours in the middle of the night could possibly help.  They can't.
 
But losing sleep WILL hurt.  A lot.  So don't.
 
Stop studying.  Maybe socialize for half an hour or so.  Then maybe spin down with some jazz (or whatever floats your boat).  Then get a really solid night sleep.  Then a good breakfast, and a brisk walk to get the blood flowing just before the exam.  That is your best bet.
 
And don't stress.  Whatever happens, stress will only make it worse.  You've worked hard (well, nearly all of you have), and now you need to sleep and then just give it your best shot.  The rest will take care of itself.
 
Good luck tomorrow.
 
David

OH this week
Hi all.  We will be grading midterms all night Tuesday and Wednesday.  Then you all are on spring break starting Thursday night.  And so:  CA's will have normal office hours until the midterm on Tuesday (that is, tonight and tomorrow night), but then will not have OH again until after spring break.
 
As for me, I'll have a modified OH schedule this coming week:
 
Mon: none for now (depends on if this "storm" every happens)
Tue: 1:30pm - 3pm (note the late start)
Wed: 1:30pm - 3:30pm (wahoo, extra Wednesday hours!)
Thu: noon to 2:45pm (normal)
Fri: We'll see...

Carpe diem.
 
David

s13-midterm1 last chance!
Hi all.  Charlie will soon post the time/location of a last-chance s13-midterm1 solution session.  Anyone who hasn't yet attended one should attend that one.  Last chance!

David

averageColor confusion (good read)
Hi all.  Turns out averageColor has generated more questions than any other assigned problem in this course!  Ever!
 
So, let's set aside some confusions.  And also provide an interesting solution option to consider.
 
First, we need to understand this basic truth:  functions cannot take numbers in decimal, or hexadecimal, or binary, or octal.  They just take numbers.  If you have a function f(n) that takes a number n, you can call f(15), f(0xF), and f(0b1111), and those are all exactly the *same*.  When you enter a value in Python, no matter what base you use, it is immediately converted to binary, which is how all numbers are stored internally.
 
Second, if  you need a 32-bit number, and you get one with fewer bits, Python naturally just adds all the leading 0's.  So 0b11 (decimal 3) is the same as 0b00000000000000000000000000000011.  You don't do anything to get those leading 0's.  They are there.
 
Third, for the rgba problem, don't worry about numbers that are larger than can fit in 32 bits.  Those are not legal rgba values, so can be ignored.
 
Now, what does a single rgba value look like?  It is a single integer, not a list, not a tuple, not a string.   An integer.
 
So, for example, the integer 2852192005.  Because base does not matter, and it's easier to think about this in base 16 (for reasons that should become apparent any second now), we'll think of that number as 0xAA00FF05.  But rest assured, 2852192005 is exactly the same number as 0xAA00FF05.
 
Now, we think of that number as being in 4 parts, each 8 bits long.  Fortunately, 8 bits correspond exactly to 2 hex digits (now you see?), so we think of the number 0xAA00FF05 as representing the rgba color where red is 0xAA, green is 0x00, blue is 0xFF, and alpha is 0x05.  In decimal, if you prefer:  red is 170, green is 0, blue is 255, and alpha is 5.
 
So, how do we get the green part of an rgba int value?  That is we have this:
    rrrrrrrrggggggggbbbbbbbbaaaaaaaa
And we just want the g's.  So first we shift this number 16 bits to the right, giving us this:
    0000000000000000rrrrrrrrgggggggg
Great.  But now we have to get rid of those r's.  Easy enough.  We bitwise-and this against 0b11111111, which lets the bottom 8 bits through but turns the rest into zeros, giving us:
    000000000000000000000000gggggggg
Perfect.
 
So that was this:   green = (rgba >> 16) & 0xFF
 
Note that 0xFF is the same as 255 which is the same as 0b11111111.  For this purpose, I think 0xFF is cleanest.
 
To continue, the averageColor problem does not take a single rgba value, but rather a list of them.  So that means it takes a list of int values, each one a 32-bit rgba value.  Something like this:
 
   rgbaList = [0x01020304, 0x05060708, 0x090A0B0C, 0x0D0E0F10]
 
That list contains 4 rgba values.  The greens of those values are 0x02, 0x06, 0x0A, and 0x0E.  Or if you prefer those in decimal, they are 2, 6, 10, and 14.  See?
 
Ok, so we can put this all together and compute the average green for any rgba list.  As such:
 
def averageGreen(rgbaList):
   totalGreen = 0
   for rgba in rgbaList:
       green = (rgba >> 16) & 0xFF
       totalGreen += green
   return totalGreen / len(rgbaList)

def testAverageGreen():
   print "Testing averageGreen()...",
   rgbaList = [0x01020304, 0x05060708, 0x090A0B0C, 0x0D0E0F10]
   expectedResult = (2 + 6 + 10 + 14) / 4 # 0x02, 0x06, 0x0A, 0x0E are 2, 6, 10, 14
   assert(averageGreen(rgbaList) == expectedResult)
   print "Passed (though more tests would be nice...)."

testAverageGreen()
 
Study that code until you really totally completely get it.  Cool.  Now we do the same to find the average red, average green, average blue, and average alpha values.  Say these are stored in the values r, g, b, and a.  Each of these values are going to be between 0 and 255 (why?).  Now we have to put them back together again into a single int rgba value.  Right?  That is, we have to convert these 4 numbers:
    rrrrrrrr
    gggggggg
    bbbbbbbb
    aaaaaaaa
Into this one number:
    rrrrrrrrggggggggbbbbbbbbaaaaaaaa
 
To do that, we'll need to shift the red bits 24 bits to the left, the green bits 16 to the left, the blue bits 8 to the left, and leave the a bits alone.  Then add those up.  You may need to re-read and think about that last sentence a few times.
 
Ok, so you are now 95% of the way there.  The rest is up to you.
 
Well, ok, I'll do the rest, too.  Please do not just copy-paste this code.  You may use it as a reference, to study and learn the material.  But be sure you understand this.  And type it in yourself.  And don't use the zip* at all.  I include it here for fun.  Though you should understand what that zip* is doing and how it works and why I used it.
 
def getPart(rgba, shift): return (rgba >> shift) & 0xFF 
def rgbaToPartList(rgba): return [getPart(rgba, shift) for shift in [24, 16, 8, 0]]
def partListToRgba((r,g,b,a)): return (r<<24) + (g<<16) + (b<<8) + a
def rgbaListToRgbaPartList(rgbaList): return [rgbaToPartList(rgba) for rgba in rgbaList]
def avg(vals): return sum(vals)/len(vals)
def averageColor(rgbaList): return partListToRgba(avg(parts) for parts in zip(*rgbaListToRgbaPartList(rgbaList)))

def testAverageColor():
   print "Testing averageColor()...",
   assert(rgbaToPartList(0x090A0B0C) == [0x09, 0x0A, 0x0B, 0x0C])
   assert(partListToRgba([0x09, 0x0A, 0x0B, 0x0C]) == 0x090A0B0C)
   rgbaList = [0x01020304, 0x05060708, 0x090A0B0C, 0x0D0E0F10]
   rAvg = (0x01 + 0x05 + 0x09 + 0x0D)/4
   gAvg = (0x02 + 0x06 + 0x0A + 0x0E)/4
   bAvg = (0x03 + 0x07 + 0x0B + 0x0F)/4
   aAvg = (0x04 + 0x08 + 0x0C + 0x10)/4
   avgColor = partListToRgba((rAvg, gAvg, bAvg, aAvg))
   assert(avgColor == ((rAvg<<24) + (gAvg<<16) + (bAvg<<8) + aAvg))
   assert(averageColor(rgbaList) == avgColor)
   print "Passed (though more tests would be nice...)."

testAverageColor()
 
Enjoy!
 
Also, if you have more questions about averageColor after all this, please take them to OH today!
 
Good luck with it.  And...  Carpe diem.
 
David
 
hw7, 75's, and AMG
Hi all.  For the 97% of you who are trying your hardest on hw7 (great job!), and who plan to submit your best work (of course!), you can stop reading now.  Sorry for the spam.  For the others...
 
Some students with hw averages below 75 have asked if somehow hw7 could be used to improve their averages, if basically they should intentionally torpedo part of hw7 to get a 75 instead of a Pass/Excused.
 
Before answering the question, let me first say this:  this sort of "grade calculus" is almost never in your best interests.  Just do the work as best you can, please.   Submit your best work, not your best guess at what might result somehow in a higher score due to some apparent loophole in a grading scheme.
 
Ok, so now I will answer the question directly:  no.  Don't do that.  To help with the grade calculus, please include this:  Doing so will eliminate you from AMG consideration.
 
Of course, the grading was not designed to encourage such self-defeating behavior.  It was designed to promote solid teamwork and studious preparation for the upcoming midterm.  Which it did, for most of you.  Whew!
 
Given that the hw's are generally all solo, and this hw is nearly all collaborative, it was not appropriate to include the hw7 score in general in your semester average.  Besides, it being collaborative, we would expect nearly everyone to score 100 on hw7, so including it as a normal hw would just artificially inflate everyone's hw grade.  Which is a nice ego boost perhaps, but hard to defend pedagogically.  And with a median grade presently in the upper 80's overall (and much higher just on hw's), it's not like we need to artificially inflate grades from those lofty heights.
 
In any case:  I expect everyone to try their hardest on hw7.  I will not modify the posted grading scheme at this point, but if for some reason it seems to me that someone deliberately undermined their hw7 performance, that naturally would eliminate them from consideration for AMG, which explicitly requires effort beyond that.  Also, a collaborative hw is not suitable for AMG, so hw7 will not be among those hw's that will count for AMG.
 
Please hold high standards, try your hardest, do your best work, then accept whatever outcome that produces.

Carpe diem.
 
David

Reminder: Week 7 case studies (BFS, A*, and Steganography) not on midterm1
Hi all.  Reminder that BFS, A*, and Steganography will be included on midterm2, not midterm1 (though anything can appear as bonus anywhere).  Midterm1 covers everything else we've done, though.
 
Good luck with your studies!
 
David

Optional Lecture is Wednesday, not today
Hi all.  So everyone can focus now on the upcoming midterm (which is 75 hours from now!), we will not have an optional lecture today.  Instead, we'll have the optional lecture Wednesday at 4:30pm.  I'll post the location before then.  As usual, we'll also have a reprise sometime after the lecture for those who wish to attend but cannot.
 
Meanwhile, Piazza traffic and OH attendance remain very low, which may mean that you all are in such effective study groups that you have no need for these supports, but it may just perhaps also mean something else...
 
I know that some of you are working hard prepping for the midterm.  But I also know some of you are not.  I really hope that changes today.  In any case, as always, we are here to help.  Lots of OH, lots of review sessions, all there for the taking.
 
Good luck, and carpe diem.
 
David

scarf
Hi all.   Someone apparently left a black scarf at last night's s13-midterm1 solution session.
 
The scarf is in my office.
 
David

My OH today (noon to 1:30pm)
Hi all.  I'll have some extra Friday OH today from noon to 1:30pm.  See some of you then.

David


BFS (Breadth-First Search) and A* code from yesterday's lecture
Hi all.  I'll post this to the course website either this weekend or early next week (no time pressure, it's not on the first midterm and not assigned in hw7), along with some notes.
 
For now, here is the code we wrote yesterday in class:
 
10:30 lecture:  morningbfs.py and morningastar.py
 
3:00 lecture:  afternoonbfs.py and afternoonastar.py
 
Enjoy!  And... Carpe diem!

David

Do The Right Thing (and attend regularly)
Hi all.  This is required reading!
 
Around 1/8th of you not only opted out of quiz6, but opted out of attending entirely.  This is not in the spirit or the letter of the rules for this or any week.
 
As with all lectures and recitations, attendance at recitation today is required, as always (except for the usual pre-arranged excused absences for all the obvious reasons).
 
During recitation today, you may (or may not, we'll see) take a short practice quiz excerpt (perhaps just a problem or two) and then submit it with your name and andrew id.  As with yesterday's lecture and most Thursday lectures, this gives us an attendance record.
 
I have no interest (and I'm sure you don't, either!) in making all kinds of attendance-related policies (attend this or lose X points on that, etc).  Instead, we have the blanket "Do The Right Thing" policy.
 
But we definitely do have an attendance policy (see the syllabus for details), and we also have records of attendance, in the form of quizzes mainly, and those will in fact come to bear in two ways:  a pattern of non-attendance will eliminate AMG as an option, and also those students sitting right on a "bubble" (A/B, or B/C, or C/D) will not be helped by non-attendance.
 
Note that this is about patterns.  If you have a single unexcused absence somewhere, it's not ideal of course, but it's also no big deal.  That would probably not affect your grade.  But where once is an exception, twice is a trend, and thrice is a pattern.  And a pattern of non-attendance most assuredly may lower your semester grade, particularly in AMG and bubble cases, but in extreme cases it may drop your grade regardless.
 
Bottom line:  Do The Right Thing, and attend regularly.

Carpe diem.

David

quiz6 grades
Hi all.  Quiz6 is graded (great job, CA's!).  Exactly half (to the person!) of you opted for the quiz to count.  The raw score was a solid 61, which was adjusted by adding 15, and also the two dozen scores that were below 50 were all replaced with 50 (a nod to taking the risk and taking the quiz, which was a good decision, I think).
 
As usual, adjusted scores are in autolab.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Tomorrow's optional quiz
Hi all.  To be clear: tomorrow's quiz is optional, so you may skip it and it will not affect your semester grade.  If you take it, though, then the grade counts, whether it raises your average or not.  It may not be the hardest quiz ever, but you never know...
 
The quiz will cover mainly last week's material, as usual.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Not enough carpe in yesterday's diem
Hi all.  The whole point of this week (15-112-wise) is to give you time and space to digest the material we've covered and to properly prepare for the upcoming midterm.  The point is decidedly not to simply give you time off to not do that.  That's what spring break is for.  And it's almost here.
 
Last night, OH was nearly empty.  Which is to suggest that this bold student-requested new plan to empower you to do the right thing with your study time has, well, not succeeded wildly so far.  To say the least.
 
I'm hoping that was your collective breath before diving in full speed ahead tonight.
 
I hope to hear about overfull clusters at OH, about great attendance at the evening review and solution sessions, about huge numbers of small-group tutoring sessions, and to see vast numbers of really thoughtful Piazza questions.  Today.
 
Let's go, folks.  Make this happen.  Learn this material.  Master it.  Crush it.
 
You can't do that by just putting 3 or 4 hours into hw7.  That's just not going to do it.  This is the week to pour yourself into this material, immerse yourself, and convert all that hard work you have invested so far into valuable long-term working knowledge.  Now is the time to cement your understanding of this material.  Now is the time to make this not just an exercise in hard work, but part of a solid foundation for your career in a technical discipline.  Now is the time.
 
You can do it.  We are here to help.

Carpe diem.  This diem.  Today.  Now.
 
David

Midterm solution prep clarification (those were s13-midterm1 solutuion sessions for hw7)
Hi all.  Sorry, but Charlie's post (@4185) seems to be confusing some of you.
 
Hw7 requires that you complete s13-midterm1.  Then you have to attend an s13-midterm1 solution session.

Charlie's post (@4185) is a list of those s13-midterm1 solution sessions.
 
And there you have it.
 
David

midterm1: BFS out, Othello and Connect4 in
Hi all.  To be clear:  the breadth-first search (BFS) code we wrote yesterday is an interesting application of everything we've learned this semester, and may appear on midterm2 and the final, but...  It will not appear on midterm1, the content for which ended with last week's material (so week6 and hw6 are indeed fair game).
 
Also, Othello and Connect4 are definitely fair game.  I'd only look at those if you mastered wordSearch, on which they are based, and I would strongly recommend knowing wordSearch well.  But don't fixate on wordSearch.  You need to know all the case studies, and all the hw problems, and all the quiz problems, and all the material from the course notes, and any reasonable variation of all of the above.  While you don't need to know all the hundreds of practice problems, per se, they all are reasonable variations and any of them could be part of the midterm (though, just being realistic, we won't ask you to write 200+ lines of free response in the 10-20 minutes or so allotted for free response, right?).
 
Good luck with it!  And of course...  Carpe diem.

David

hw7 posted, due Sunday 8pm
Hi all.  Here is hw7.
 
Any moment now, Charlie will post the times for those review sessions.
 
Also, note that this is due at 8pm rather than 10pm.  This will allow folks to attend a review session that same night, if you are so inclined.
 
Enjoy!  And... Carpe diem!

David

Extended-time midterm exams
Hi again.  For those students who have pre-arranged university approval through Larry Powell's office for extended-time exams, you should contact Larry's office today to make arrangements for our midterm.  In any case, they will be proctoring all of our extended-time midterms (and finals).  You also have the option of taking the exam at the normally assigned time, but then there will not be any extended time available.  Either way, you should decide and make appropriate arrangements at this time.
 
Carpe diem.

David

Alternate midterm exam
Hi all.  This is in regards to the university policy on examinations, available here.
 
We will offer an alternate midterm exam date for any of the following cases (which is more liberal than the official policy):
Students who have at least 2 other exams or major projects due within a 24-hour timeframe (which is a liberalization of what the policy says for midterms);
Students who have a direct conflict with both our 10:30am and 3pm classes on Tuesday; or
Students who are away this weekend on at least a 3-day university-approved absence (so a 1-day or 2-day athletic or academic trip would not qualify, sorry).
For these students, we will offer an optional alternate midterm exam date.  It will be as soon after (not before) Tuesday as practicable for you.
 
Please note that we cannot offer an alternate midterm to students who are generally very busy, rather than meeting one of the conditions above.  Everyone at CMU is very busy!  Everyone from CMU will remain very busy long after they leave CMU.  The key is to learn to thrive despite being so very busy!
 
In any case, it is expected that most of you will take the midterm this coming Tuesday.  However, a few of you presumably will qualify for the optional alternate exam date.  If you are in that group, and you wish to take our midterm at an alternate date, then you need to send me an email today making this request.  In your email, include the details of the conflicting event(s), and then also list all (truly, all) the times for the rest of the week when you could sit for our midterm.
 
Thanks, and carpe diem!

David

Code from today
Hi all.  Here are both versions of the code from today:
 
morning.py and afternoon.py
 
Charlie found the goofy little bug from this morning.  When we created a random new board, we accidentally set the zero location to the bottom-right corner even if it wasn't there.  Whoops.  And nice catch, Charlie!

Anyhow, both are attached.  This is breadth-first search, or BFS.  It works, but it's too slow.  On Thursday, we will move to A* (pronounced "A-Star"), which is *way* faster.
 
Enjoy!

David

Hw7 pre-pre-release
Hi all.  I am in OH and then lecture all day, so here is a pre-pre-release of part of hw7.
 
Working in groups of 2-4 people, working really truly actually together, do the following:
* Manually graded:
* f13 midterm #1
* Autograded:
* Write pokerHands from f12-practice-week4
* Write multiplyPolynomials from f12-practice-week5
Important note:  you may not ever electronically copy anything from or to anyone for hw.  You must type your own solutions.  You may work together to form solutions, but even then you cannot just outright copy them.
 
Also, NOT IN A GROUP, do this:
* s13 midterm #1
 
Note that everyone will have to attend one of the s13-midterm1 solution sessions offered this week.  We'll have signups for these by tomorrow, and we'll offer them on Wed/Thu/Fri/Sat, so this should work fine for everyone.
 
This is a pre-pre-release.  More is coming....
 
Carpe diem.
 
Enjoy!

David
 
My OH tomorrow (normal, except not from 12:25pm to 1:35pm)
Hi all.  The powers-that-be have "invited" me to attend a meeting tomorrow at 12:30pm, so...  My OH tomorrow will be as normal except not during that meeting.
 
That is, my OH will run from noon to 12:25pm, and then from 1:35pm to just before 3pm.
 
Thanks.

David

Awesome work (really)
Hi all.  It's heartening to see so many of you (students and CA's alike) put so much into this, and especially to see so much success as a result.  Yesterday was for sure a very busy day, with around 1,000 Piazza contributions (in one day!), and also around 1,000 Autolab submissions (ditto!).  In the end, the median score of those who submitted was -- once again -- a perfect 80/80 on the autograded portion.  Fabulous!
 
For the many of you who ultimately bested hw6, great job!  Kudos!
 
But for the many of you who did not, there is still time!  There is only a 7.5-point deduction for submitting today.  And we are here to help you.  We hope you find a way to get as much done as possible today, and we'll muster as many CA resources as we can to man both Piazza and OH.  Good luck with it!
 
In any case, as we move past hw6, we set our sights in earnest on the midterm.  I'll post the plan here soon.  For now, though, I just want to commend all of you for your hard work and dedication.  You have collectively moved a mountain.  Now let's move on to the next mountain, the midterm.  And then, a long week of very well-deserved rest.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
 
hw6 deadline + late penalty changes
Hi all.
 
Since some of you lost an hour or so to the set operations issue, the hw deadline is extended by an hour, to 11pm tonight.  Actually, there's a tiny buffer even after that, so technically it's 11:10pm tonight.
 
Second, since we really, really want you to finish this in preparation for the upcoming midterm, the 1-day late penalty has been reduced to 7.5 points.  So you can submit up to 11:10pm tomorrow night for a 7.5 point late penalty.
 
Finally, I'm heading out now to spend some time with my lovely wife (dinner and then the Pitt basketball game!), and she has requested the laptop stay at home.  Sounds reasonable.  So I'll be offline for the next N hours.  Of course, our awesome CA's are still here to help throughout that time!  :-)
 
Good luck wrapping up hw6.
 
David

Important read: Autolab weirdness with set operations
Hi all.  So...  Autolab is using an older version of Python, which is mostly ok, but not here.
 
You cannot use set operators, like:
 
    s += thing
 
Instead, you have to use set methods, like:
 
    s.add(thing)
 
This is also true for other operators.  Also, don't create a set with { 1, 2, 3 }, but rather with the set() function, which can take a list which it converts to a set, or take no arguments and create an empty set.
 
Because of this confusion, I have increased the submissions from 5 to 8, as some of you may have lost submissions over this.
 
Sorry for the confusion.
 
David

isMagicSquare says nothing about being normal
Hi all.  We are getting a flood of this issue, too.
 
The writeup is only looking for a magic square, not just a normal magic square.
 
The difference?  In a normal magic square, the numbers must be from 1 to n**2.
 
Here, we look for *any* numbers that are in a square (not a rectangle) and where the sum of the rows, cols, and diagonals all are the same.
 
David

isKingsTour is not a variant of wordSearch (instead, use my hint from earlier today)
Hi all.  Many of you are trying valiantly to warp wordSearch into isKingsTour.  This is not a good idea (though if you got it to work somehow that way, then fine, you don't have to undo anything you've already done).  But if you've not gotten it to work that way, even if you think you're close, you would probably do well to start over with a better approach.
 
For one thing, using wordSearch here totally bypasses Polya Step 2.  I don't think anybody would try on their own to manually solve it that way.  So this is a perfect example of not thinking through a solution carefully, and instead trying to repurpose and nudge code repeatedly until it works.  Ugh.
 
In any case, there is a much easier and clearer way to do it.  Actually, there are several.  I posted one such option in a hint earlier this morning.  If you are struggling with isKingsTour, you may do well to read that hint again.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

We do not debug for you (only because we care enough not to!)
Hi all.  We are getting a flood of "questions" that are not really questions at all.  They are just walls of code and a request to help debug.
 
We are happy to answer *specific* questions of yours. But we will not debug for you.  Doing so would cripple you, since it is absolutely essential that you learn your own debugging skills.  Nobody can be even a halfway decent coder without being a really good debugger.
 
One thing:  almost always, you can figure out your bug by ADDING PRINT STATEMENTS.  Just sprinkle print statements throughout your code, printing the important variables as you go.  Then carefully review what got printed just before things went wrong, and nearly always this will lead you quickly to your bug.
 
Print statements work.  Give them a try.
 
One last thing:  if you do this, and you are still lost, and cannot form a specific question for Piazza, then we can still help, but not via Piazza.  Instead, then you need to head over to OH and get some in-person help.  But those occasions are rare.  Almost always, judicious use of print statements is enough to find your bugs.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

hw6 autograder is posted
Good luck!
 
David

Please make your posts private!
Thanks.

Code from yesterday's optional lecture
Hi all.  Appended is some of the code from yesterday's optional lecture.  For those who missed it and are interested, Charlie will host a reprise probably on Monday.  More here soon.

Carpe diem.
 
David
 
------------------------------------
from heapq import *

def heapsort(iterable):
    h = [ ]
    for value in iterable:
        heappush(h, value)
    return [heappop(h) for i in range(len(h))]
print "heapsort result =", heapsort([1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 2, 4, 6, 8, 0])

def getCodeFromTree(tree, prefix, map):
    if (type(tree) == str):
        char = tree # it wasn't a tree, it was a string at a leaf
        map[char] = prefix
    else:
        leftChild = tree[0]
        rightChild = tree[1]
        getCodeFromTree(leftChild, prefix+"0", map)
        getCodeFromTree(rightChild, prefix+"1", map)

def makeHuffmanCode(a):
    pq = [ ]
    for val in a: heappush(pq, val)
    while (len(pq) > 1):
        (weight0, char0) = heappop(pq)
        (weight1, char1) = heappop(pq)
        weight2 = weight0 + weight1
        char2 = [ char0, char1 ]
        print weight2, char2
        heappush(pq, (weight2, char2))
    (weight, tree) = heappop(pq)
    print tree
    map = dict()
    getCodeFromTree(tree, "", map)
    print map

print makeHuffmanCode([(0.4, "a"), (0.35, "b"), (0.2, "c"), (0.05, "d")])

isKingsTour suggestion
Hi all.  I'm seeing some very long and complicated attempts at isKingsTour.  Some of them eventually are working, many others are not.
 
For those who are not meeting much success, how about this as an alternate way to view the problem:
 
Could you go once through the entire board and make a dictionary that maps each step number to the (row, col) position on the board where that step occurred?
 
And then, if you had such a map, could you then easily walk through the steps in order and see if they are each legal steps in a legal kings tour?
 
Hmmmm...
 
David

Write wordSearch (and all other case studies) from scratch!
Hi all.  This is really important.  The *only* way to be sure you know a case study is to write it yourself from scratch.  Start with a new empty blank editor.  And write it.  Yourself.  If you get stuck, you have the case study, so then look at it and see where you are stuck, get unstuck, and finish.  Then, a while later, do it again.  And keep doing this until you can easily write the whole thing.  Don't memorize the code, of course, but *understand* it.
 
If you can write a case study easily from scratch, then you get it.
 
If you cannot, then you don't.
 
It's that simple.
 
Carpe diem.  <-- This really means something, especially in this context.  You know *exactly* what to do (at least in this case).  Now it's just a matter of *doing* it.  Today!  Carpe diem!
 
As for not having time to do this, that's bass ackwards.  You don't have time NOT to do this.  I am hearing reports and reading Piazza questions from students who have delved into the hw without understanding, let alone mastering, the case studies. And -- shock! -- they are struggling, and burning time.  Had they first mastered the case studies, yes that would have taken several hours.  But they'd get all those hours back already, because the hw would go so much faster.  With less stress.  And better outcomes.
 
So: do not just look at the case studies!  Looking at code will teach you to code in the same way that looking at the Mona Lisa will teach you to paint.  Hogwash.  If you want to learn to code, CODE.  It's the only way.  So write those case studies, and learn them, and master them.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

wordSearchWithIntegerWildcards (what to submit)
Hi all.  There have been numerous questions about what to submit for this problem, since it seems you only have to rewrite the innermost of the 3 wordSearch functions from the case study.  Yes and no.  See, the top-level function you must expose is wordSearchWithIntegerWildcards(board, word).  That is basically just a renaming of wordSearch.  But it must be there.  It will call the next-level helper function, which itself is basically just a renaming of another function. And finally, that will call the next-next-level helper function, which is a rewrite and not just a renaming of that level's function.  You must include all 3 levels, even though you are only really modifying the last one.
 
David

Optional lecture today, 1:30-3:30pm, GHC 4307
Hi all.  The subject line says it all.  See some of you soon!

David

wordSearchWIthIntegerWildcards mistake in writeup!
Hi all.  There's actually a mistake in the writeup (yikes!).  It says "co" is not in the wordsearch.  The reasoning is that there is a "c" followed by a 2, so it would match "cat" or "cod" but not "co".  The problem is that the 2 itself matches any 2 letters, including "co".  So "co" is in there after all.  Ugh.
 
So if there is a 4, for example, then any 4-letter word is necessarily contained in the puzzle.
 
Sorry for the confusion.
 
David

quiz5 scores
Hi all.  Quiz5 scores are now released.  Adjusted score (as in Autolab) is raw score + 10 (for non-zero raw scores).  This did not result in a median at 70, but I couldn't justify elevating grades by more than that.  The quiz clearly shows what we already know:  we need to seriously study, review, and cement your understanding of the material prior to the midterm.  (*) No worries, that's why we cleared next week.  Of course, you have to do your part and study, study, study.  And also, study the right way. You can pour 20 hours into "studying" and walk away with little to show for it.  We'll discuss this more later.   For now, focus on hw6, as that is due Sunday.  Then we'll shift our focus to preparing in earnest for the upcoming midterm.
 
(*) The comment above required this asterisk:  while we know that exam performance must go up, and soon now, we also know that homework performance is rock solid.  This is not a time for panic.  You are doing very well so far.  If the semester ended today, despite low quiz grades, the semester grades would be quite high.  Of course, this is prior to the midterms and final, which may well change that a bit, but even so, it's clear:  you are doing very well, and learning a lot.  We just need to drive up quiz and exam performance.  Which we shall!
 
Carpe diem.

David

Important for AMG: submit all hw's (do the work!)
Hi all.  As we have discussed, AMG allows an alternate path to a C for students who have struggled early on in the course.  It is meant for students who are working hard yet struggling.  I expect a few dozen students to take advantage of AMG this semester and receive hard-won and well-deserved C's at the semester that way.
 
That said, AMG is certainly not meant for students who are not doing the work!  And now that we are moving past the halfway point in hw's, it is essential for anyone interested in AMG grading at the semester to be certain to do all the work moving forward.  In particular, anyone who fails to complete a significant portion of any single hw from hw6 onwards will be disqualified from consideration for AMG.  So:  please be sure to do the work!
 
Also, to be clear:  you do not sign up for AMG.  Everyone is considered for AMG, and at the semester everyone receives the higher of their normally-computed grade and their AMG-computed grade.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

midterm #1 --> Tue March 4th
Hi all.  As we discussed in class, and as you voted heavily in favor of, midterm #1 will be moved to Tuesday, March 4th.  Next week is wall-to-wall review and midterm prep (hopefully with some fun thrown in for good measure).

Carpe diem.
 
David

hw6 is fully posted
Hi all.  As noted in class, the dictionary and set questions are now included.  Also, as advertised, there were a couple additions -- some Reasoning Over Code problems, isMagicSquare, friendsOfFriends, and the bonus playIsola problem.  Please carefully review the writeup to be sure you did everything specified.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

quiz hint: maybe do the free response first
Hi all.  A number of you have found that it's more time effective to do the free response first, at least as much as you can easily do.  That probably is when you earn the most points per minute...
 
Also, be certain to keep the brief responses brief.  We are literally looking for a just a few words in almost all cases.  When you write 5 or 6 lines of text, you are just wasting your time, and also just making it harder to grade.  Please be very brief, and to the point, saying just what is needed and nothing more.
 
Finally, some of you go linearly through the quiz no matter what.  Even if you get completely stuck on a tracing or reasoning problem.  This is probably not an ideal strategy.  If you get stuck, move on, quickly.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

hw6: Ignore sets + dictionary + hash on midterm
Hi all.  Sorry for the confusion.  A few problems refer to sets or dictionaries or hashes on the midterm.  You can ignore them.
 
In case it's inobvious which ones I mean, I'll post a list of them tomorrow when I post the final version of the hw.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Please make your posts private
Thanks.
David

hw5 style grading code walkthroughs
Hi all.  Instead of a traditional style grade for hw5, each of you will meet for a short (10 minute) 1-on-1 meeting with your CA for a so-called code walkthrough.  This is how it works in industry (usually, at least).  It's a great way to learn how to write better code.
 
In any case, the two of you will review your code and discuss ways that it could be tighter, more style compliant, cleaner, etc.  Your CA will also assign a style grade based on this meeting (though not during the meeting; it will be posted sometime later).
 
To that end:  you will be contacted very soon by your CA to set up these meetings.  They are required (though, again, really, truly only 10 minutes, so not a big time commitment).  So please respond to your CA right away and please be certain to attend your assigned timeslot.
 
Speaking of which, we'll need some groundrules to avoid mayhem (seeing as we will have literally hundreds of these 1-on-1 meetings in the next few days), so here they are:
 
* Everyone must sign up for a 10-minute timeslot at a time that works for your CA (who will provide a variety of times for you too choose from)
* Everyone must respond promptly to the CA's email to sign up.  Not signing up will result in -10 style points on hw5.
* Be on time.  Each minute late counts as -1 point in style grade, no exceptions.
* No meetings will run late.  All minutes will end at their assigned times, even if you arrive late.
* There will be no makeups for missed meetings, which also will result in -10 style grades on hw5.
* Don't miss your meetings...
* Your CA will use their own laptop (you do not need one) and download and grade the hw5.py that you submitted.
* With so little time, your CA may not be able to cover all style concerns.  That's ok.  They will cover what they can, and grade you accordingly.
* Your CA will send you a report with their observations and a grade within a few days after your meeting.
 
Again, this is a great opportunity to learn more about how to code well.  You have invested so much into your homeworks, we want you to get the maximum possible return on that investment.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw6 pre-release
Hi all.  If it's Wednesday, it's hw pre-release day!  I want to hold off on the full release and see what we cover tomorrow in class.  But here is plenty enough to get you started:
 
* Manually Graded:
   * #1-4 from f12-midterm1
   * #1-2 from f12-quiz5
 
* Autograded:
   * isKingsTour from f12-midterm1
   * wordSearchWithIntegerWildcards from f12-quiz5 (name the function wordSearchWithIntegerWildcards)
   * isLegalSudoku from f12-hw7a
   * bestQuiz from f12-hw7a
This is due Sunday 10pm as usual.  Good luck, and enjoy!

David

Quiz4 grades
Hi all.  Thanks to the awesome (as usual!) CA grading effort, quiz4 is fully graded.
 
Unfortunately, with some notable exceptions, it did not go very well for many of you, which is a recurring theme on quizzes this semester for some reason.  We'll get this figured out.  I think for all the great effort on hw, there's not as much corresponding effort in studying for quizzes.  And effort or not, there's certainly not the kind of effective mastering of quiz material that we all need (and that historically has started happening more by this stage of the semester).  It's time to get that fixed.  The first midterm is right around the corner, and folks need to do better on these kinds of assessments by then.  Which is to say, pretty much now.  But we can do it!
 
As for the numbers, the raw median was 51.  This was adjusted by multiplying by 70/51.  So the adjusted median -- the one in autolab -- is 70.  Also, the max adjusted score was 110 in any case (otherwise, we'd have some scores up to 128, which is too high to justify even with this adjustment).
 
This should not be a morale buster (though, true, it should definitely not be a morale booster, either!).
 
Instead, it should simply be a clarion call to action.  We need to fix this.  You need to study and practice quiz material more, and we need to do a better job helping you do that more effectively.  We all can do this.  So:  let's do it.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

What to practice today
Hi all.  After today's lecture, everyone should practice writing all of these from scratch:
 
* make2dList
* print2dList
* wordSearch
 
You should practice until each of these is really easy for you to write from first principles.  Of course, don't memorize them.  That's silly and useless.  Instead, *understand* them.  That's invaluable.  And you would naturally expect that on a quiz you'd be asked to write any reasonable variation of these, so practice those, too.  For example, wordSearch with wraparound.  You can check out previous quizzes for other reasonable variants, but you can also dream up your own.
 
In any case, the hw is not assigned tonight, and that's a good thing, since you all have some time to practice just this sort of thing.
 
Enjoy!!!

David


My OH change (none Tuesday, some Friday)
Hi all.  Sorry, but I have to reschedule my OH from tomorrow to Friday.  So I will not have Tuesday OH this week, but instead I'll have Thursday noon to 3pm and Friday noon to 2pm.

Thanks.
 
David

Confluence alternate lecture and quiz
Hi all.  This post is mainly for our Design students:
 
Once again, our Design students will be busy with Confluence on Thursday and so most will miss Thursday's lecture.  The doodle poll had exactly one time that worked for everyone who responded:  Friday, 4:30-6pm.  Any Design students who did not already participate in the doodle poll -- or anyone else attending Confluence -- can email me today to sign up for that alternate lecture, where you will cover the material from Thursday's lecture, and also take Thursday's quiz.  Optionally, the session will continue for another half hour, where you will cover a compressed version of Friday's recitation, too.  So the required session ends at 6pm, and the optional session really runs until 6:30pm.  Again, please email me now if you did not participate in the doodle poll but you wish to attend Confluence and participate in this alternate lecture and quiz.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Halfway!
Hi all.  Nice job on hw5!  The median was yet another perfect 80/80.  Woohoo!  And we had two 82.5/80 submissions, and a total of 27 with more than 80, and fully 276 with 80-or-higher.  Sweet!  Plus, the word is that OH was steady but not panicky, as was Piazza.  This is all very good.  Nice job, team!!!
 
And then there's this:  we have 10 main hw's this semester.  And you have finished 5 of them now.  So you are now halfway done with the hw's.
 
Of course, there is the term project, and the midterms, and the final.  So plenty to be done besides.

Even so, you have completed half of the journey, so far as the hw is concerned.
 
Kudos!!!
 
David

About style grades and comments
Hi all.  Last post for a while...
 
Everyone should carefully read the comments relating to their style grades on hw4.  Lest you make the same mistakes and lose lots of points needlessly on hw5.
 
Also, note that each style category has a cap of -2 points.  So even if every single line is 80+ characters,  you'll only lose -2 points for that.  Though it'd be horrible.  But still, only -2.
 
Finally:  note that good style is not something you should add after the fact.  You should use it all along.  It's like a seatbelt.  It protects you from bad outcomes.  You shouldn't only buckle your seatbelt when you are approaching a seatbelt check.  You should always wear them.
 
Wear your good-style seatbelts all the time.  That is:  always code with good style, from the first line you write to the last.  You will write more code faster with fewer bugs that way.  For sure.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Don't round when you don't have to!
Hi again.  A bunch of you seem to be rounding your results for various problems when that is not required.  In general, rounding only reduces your accuracy.  If the problem does not explicitly require rounding, don't do it!
 
Now, it may be that when we print a result, we may round it.  That's a printing issue, to make results readable. In general we would still want that result to be as accurate as possible.

Carpe diem.
 
David

7 max submissions
Hi all.  Since this is your first week dealing with the joys of mutablility, I think it's reasonable to give you a few extra autograder submissions.
 
So you have 7 total to work with this week.
 
7 is a lot, and surely more than you should need.  You should hopefully use fewer.  We do not want to establish unwelcome excessive dependencies on the autograder.
 
But 7 is fair for this week.

We'll reduce it again next week.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Important: Do not modify arguments (or autograder error reports may seem to lie!)
Hi all.  Important hint/note here:  you must not modify arguments unless explicitly told otherwise.  in general, it is expected that when you call a function f(L) with a list L, that list will be unmodified.  Unless, of course, the function explicitly says it will modify it.
 
 
This has a serious consequence regarding the autograder:  if you modify a function's arguments, then you may get corrupted error reports from the autograder.
 
Note that doing this will not generate false negatives.  That is, when the autograder says there is an error, there is in fact an error.
 
Only, when the autograder reports the arguments that produced the error, if you modified those arguments in your function, then you'll see those modified arguments.  That is, the arguments will be WRONG.  They will not be the ones the generated the error.  Yikes!!!
 
Bottom line:  don't do that.  Don't modify arguments.
 
Hope this helps.
 
David
 
hw5 autograder is live (use those 4 submissions judiciously!)
Hi all.  The subject line says it all.  Be smart.  Make each submission really count.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

f11 is f12 (sigh)
Hi all.  So all the links for hw5 were correct (whew), but some were mistakenly labeled f11 instead of f12.  This is because the title on the f12 hw5 document actually said f11.  Sigh.
 
All this is fixed:  The title in the f12 hw5 document says f12, the labels on this semester's hw5 links also say f12, and the links which were correct all along are still correct.
 
Since the links were correct, everyone was fortunately working on the right problem set all along.  So this isn't really a major issue.  Whew!
 
Even so, sorry for the confusion.
 
David

For Design students attending Confluence this week (please read and fill out poll, due tonight)
Hi all.  For our Design students, and anyone else planning to attend Confluence this week:  this event conflicts with Thursday's 3pm lecture (and quiz!).
 
The easiest option is for you to attend the 10:30am lecture that same day.  That's fine.
 
For those who cannot do that, assuming there are enough of you in that situation to warrant this, and also that there is some time that works for most or all of you, then we will try to provide an alternate lecture+quiz time that does not conflict with Confluence.
 
To that end:  please fill out this doodle poll now (provide your andrew id as your name).  First thing tomorrow morning, I will check the results and get back to you with a plan.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw5 pre-release == release
You have all of hw5.  Sorry for the slow posting to the course website.  It'll be there when the autograder gets posted, which this week is early Sunday morning (later and later each week, as promised!).
 
Thanks.
 
David

Code from optional lecture
Hi all.  For those who attended, here is the code, warts and all:
    weAreArtists.py  and  weAreArtistsWithFractions.py
 
For those who did not attend, the code is still attached, only it's probably of nominal value without a multi-hour explanation as to what it is doing and why and how.  Also, the code was written super-duper fast, cutting corners deliberately, and perhaps also injecting an inadvertent bug here or there.  Bottom line:  it is purely demonstrational, and decidedly not for use in any other manner.
 
Enjoy!
 
David

Hw5: ignore contracts and z
Hi again.  For hw5, you can igore all references to "contracts" (something we are not covering this semester, but so you know, they are basically glorified assert statements, at least how we use them in 15-112).  In the linear regression question, you can also ignore all references to the z function and SSresz and such (that was useful for the example in the notes, but not needed to do hw5).
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Optional lecture today, 1:30pm, GHC 4307
Hi all.  My fever is down so I think we're a go for the optional lecture:  today, 1:30pm-3:30pm, GHC 4307.
 
In a stark contrast to last week's optional lecture, today will have no theory, little math, and lots of coding.  :-)
 
Attendance is optional, of course.
 
See some of you soon!

David

My OH today (now 3-4pm)
Hi all.  Please note that my OH today will actually run 3-4pm rather than later.  Reason:  I'm beginning to slip a bit under the weather (my kids both missed school this week due to flu-like symptoms, but we all had flu shots and they were well again quickly, so this is almost surely not the actual flu).
 
At this time, I plan to go home at 4pm, get lots of sleep, and be ready for tomorrow's optional lecture.  But we'll see.  I'll post here if any changes are needed.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

hw5 Scrabble hint
Hi all.  Here's a hint for Scrabble:  there is no need to generate all the permutations of the letters in the hand (good thing, since that's a bit complicated to do).  There's a different and much easier way to attack this problem.  Question:  say that the word "amaze" is in the dictionary, and my hand (not worrying about upper/lower case) contains the letters "aaaemnxz".  Could you easily determine whether or not that particular word could be constructed from those letters?  Hmmm.....
 
David

Study group sheets for today's quiz
Hi all.  Since several have asked, sure why not, we'll take any study group meeting sheets today and have a lottery at the end of the day for some more quiz bonus.  Just submit them to your CA today.
 
Of course, the point of this exercise, again, is to promote more study group sessions.
 
And of course, these have to be real, and constructive, with serious engagement by everyone attending, and all that yummy learning goodness that is supposed to happen!

Carpe diem.
 
David

hw5: change "2d" to "1d"
Hi all.  As many of you have noted, one small problem in hw5 from an earlier quiz asks you about a "2d" list.  No problem.  Please just change the problem to say "1d" list.  :-)
 
Sorry for the confusion, and good luck with it.
 
David


Today's quiz
Hi all.  Here is a reminder that the second portion of quiz4 (12 minutes of string tracing and reasoning over code) will be in recitation today. 
 
Note that you must attend your assigned recitation, unless you have an email confirmation from me of some other pre-arranged alternative.
 
Also note that for obvious reasons we cannot have quiz4 graded by recitation today.  :-)   They'll be graded sometime soon, with grades available in Autolab then, but to keep the logistics manageable, the physical copies won't be returned to you until next week's recitation.
 
Also note that anyone who qualifies for extra time will get that today, too. Please arrange directly with your CA.
 
And also note that anyone who pre-arranged a hw5 extension because they are travelling today (for academic or athletic events) will be excused from today's portion of the quiz (and will have yesterday's portion pro-rated to get to 100 points, and don't worry, we'll take into account if the median on today's portion is relatively higher and adjust accordingly).
 
Carpe diem.

David

My OH (today -> tomorrow 4-5pm)
Hi all.  Sorry for the late notice, but I have to postpone my OH today to tomorrow instead.  We'll run 4-5pm, but also later as needed.
 
Thanks.
 
David

A huge list of great practice problems for 1d lists and tuples
Hi all.  Check out this page of practice problems for you to do with your study group, or on your own.  These will definitely get you ready for hw5, for quiz5, and for everything else that may require that you know a thing or two about 1d lists.  Enjoy!!!
 
David

hw5 pre-release
If it's Wednesday, it's hw release day.  Here's most-to-all of hw5:
 
* Spring 2012 Quiz 6 (all except f5 in #1 and bonus)

* All the non-bonus problems from here  (The bonus problems there are also bonus this week)
 
This is all SOLO and should be submitted in the file hw5.py, as usual.  It's due Sunday at 10pm.
 
Enjoy!
 
David
 
On paying attention
Hi all. While I'd like to think that many of you find much of the material we cover at least somewhat interesting, even fun at times, I also am certain that nearly all of you would find some of the low-level (but essential) material to be, well, technical, dry, and tedious.
 
I agree!  (Well, sort of.  I enjoy it, too, actually, but I understand why many people wouldn't.)
 
Even so, it is very important!  The problem solving we do is the fun part.  It is a joy to craft a blank editor into a working program that solves some problem, or plays some game, or makes something beautiful.  Joy!  It is also a fine pleasure just to attack a bug for a long time and finally fix it.  Basically, coding reduces to a series of fun little puzzles, and so the coder is given steady doses of satisfaction as each puzzle in turn is solved.  Wahoo!!!
 
But...  You cannot solve the puzzles if you don't understand them, if you are stuck on the low-level details and not really engaged at the higher-level where all that joyful problem solving takes place.
 
So...  These low-level lectures may not be enthralling (sorry), but they are oh-so-necessary.  Which is why you really need to fight through the perhaps unbearable catatonia and stay focused, alert, in the moment, drinking up as much as you can.
 
And (finally the reason for this post), this is why I go out of my way to help you do that.  This is why I call on people who are adrift and try to bring them back in the fold.  It is not to punish or embarrass them.  No way!  Not in the least.  It is out of respect for them and their learning, to help them rejoin us and to learn as much as possible.  We all empathize with students who are adrift.  You are tired because you don't get enough sleep (please, please get more sleep).  You are very busy with many things on your plate.  Your minds are racing with many other important problems, deadlines, commitments, etc.  And then there's this long, complicated lecture.  So it's hard to stay focused.   Yes, it is.  Yet that is precisely what we have to do.

We are all in this together.  When we all meet for lecture, there is just us as a whole, just a single dynamic we collectively create and own in that room.  We have to all work together to make that as engaging and dynamic and (especially) *effective* as possible.
 
And one of many parts of that is for me to try to keep everyone engaged.  Which, yes, includes calling on people who are zoning out, urging them to rejoin us.
 
I hope this makes sense, and I welcome all your great energy in class, and any efforts you might make so that we all can sustain that energy and focus and LEARN every time we meet.

Carpe diem.
 
David

Quiz4
Hi all.  This is a reminder that quiz4 (on Thursday, the usual quiz day) will not only cover last week's material on efficiency and big-oh, but also re-cover week3's material on strings.

Sample question combining strings and efficiency: What is the big-oh worst-case runtime of this (assuming s has length n):
    total = 0
    for c in s:
        total += s.count(c)
Sample answer:  s.count(c) has to look through all n characters in s (right?), so it is O(n).  Of course, the loop is also O(n).  So the answer is O(n**2).
 
Sample question: Write some Python code that, when executed, empirically verifies the result you just found, that the function above in fact does run in O(n**2) time.
 
Sample answer:  Here you go:
############################
## Sample code to demonstrate that
## the function from above does
## run in quadratic time
############################

import string, time

def f(s):
    total = 0
    for c in s:
        total += s.count(c)
    return total

def timeTest(f, s):
    print "Timing for s of length %d:" % len(s),
    start = time.time()
    f(s)
    end = time.time()
    print "%0.2f s" % (end-start)
    return (end-start)

s = string.ascii_letters * 500
time1 = timeTest(f, s)
time2 = timeTest(f, 2*s)
print "Ratio = %0.2f" % (time2 / time1)  # should be very near 4.0
The website contains more practice materials, but you of course should also study the notes, the hw's, previous semesters' materials, etc.
 
As usual, tonight there will be a hw4 solution session, and tomorrow night there will be a quiz4 prep session.
Carpe diem.

David

Way to go, Charlie!!!
Hi all.  I just heard this news from John Lanyon at Academic Development:
 
Outstanding SI Leader of the Year Award
 
Charles Swanson, a senior computer science major, was recently chosen by the International Center for Supplemental Instruction at the University of Missouri-Kansas City to receive one of two Outstanding Supplemental Instruction (SI) Leader awards. The award recognizes the contributions Swanson has made to Carnegie Mellon community through his six semesters as an EXCEL Group leader and four semesters as the student supervisor of the SI & EXCEL Programs. Swanson is also head course assistant for the fundamentals of programming course for the Computer Science Department, where he oversees 36 teaching assistants. The award letter stated that the recognition honors the ?extraordinary commitment Charlie has made to SI and the positive success he has created in your program.? He will receive his award at the International Conference on SI in May as well as present on his experiences and best practices as a leader.
Congratulations, Charlie!!!!

David

hw4 recap and what lies ahead
Hi all.  Congrats on another strong hw showing!  25 of you scored a perfect 35/30 on the autograded portion (sweet!), and 286 of you scored 30 or higher, for yet another perfect 100% median on the autograded hw portion.  Nice job!!!
 
On the other hand, 40 of you scored 15/30 or lower, and 15 more did not submit and yet do not have a pre-approved extension.  Of those 55, some will make a solid submission by tonight's late deadline.  But of the rest...
 
We are getting to the point where we need to start seeing better results so that you can pass the course.  AMG is indeed an option, and it's there specifically for hard-working students not meeting results early on in the course.  But we are beginning to edge past the "early on" phase of the course.  At this point, if you are routinely scoring 50% or lower on the autograded portion of the hw (or, for that matter, on the quizzes), you very much need to be in regular contact with your CA's, receiving extensive additional tutoring.  If you are not already doing that, then email them now, right now, and start. You still have time to fix this, and we very much want to help.  But time is slipping away.  You need to take action now.  Right now.  (Carpe diem, and all...)
 
In any case, for everyone:  it was another fine week and a solid performance.  It was the breather that was advertised.  But now we dive back into the coding for a few weeks, and you know what that means.  For your planning purposes, weeks 5-7  will be similar in scope and time to weeks 1-3.  Then week 8 opens up, giving you time to breathe again and time to prep for the first midterm exam later that week.  And then... SPRING BREAK!  And spring break is exactly that, a complete break.  The course will be entirely shutdown, no hw, no optional lectures, no Piazza, no Autolab, no email, nothing.  A break, one that everyone should take and enjoy.  :-)
 
So let's have a solid 3 week stretch and then you'll enjoy 2 long weeks with a much lighter load.
 
You can do it.  We are here to help.  Let's get to it!!!

Carpe diem.
 
David

Hint: endlessly looping binary search (unboundedNumberGuessing)
Hi all.  Some of you have infinite loops in your unboundedNumberGuessing code.  There are several possible causes of this.  Here's one...
 
Say we are looking for the number 3 with binary search, and we have narrowed the range down to [2,3].  So we guess (2+3)/2, which is 5/2, which is 2.  2 is too low.  We can't update our lower bound to our guess, because our resulting bounds will still be just [2,3].  And then we would LOOP FOREVER.  But we know that 2 cannot be the right value.  We just guessed it, and it was wrong, right?  Think about this.  Think about the fix.
 
The writeup already mentions this, but in a different way:  "Actually, since you'd know that 4 and 8 could not be N, you would know N is between 5 and 7 inclusively."
 
Hope this helps.  And...  Carpe diem.
 
David

Welcome to Piazza!
Hi all.  This is to confirm that Piazza is now set up properly.  Wahoo!  Welcome to piazza!  :-)
 
Also: please note that everyone who was on the waitlist as of a day ago is now in Piazza.  This does not mean you are enrolled in the course.  It just allows you to participate in the course while still on the waitlist.  Please see me if you have any questions or concerns about this.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Office Hours Tonight! 7-9:30pm
Hi all.  Even though many of you may need Thursday's lecture, and also Friday's recitation, to make a serious dent in hw1, you may still benefit by attending office hours tonight.  Just look for the blue hoodies in one of the GHC 5th floor clusters (5201 or 5205), from 7 to 9:30pm tonight.
 
For example, you might practice problems like these:
 
    print 25 & 19
    print 25 | 19
    print 25 ^ 19
 
Of course, you can put different numbers in there besides 25 and 19.  Can you reliably and quickly predict the results?  If not, you should head over to office hours now.
 
Also, you could use OH (office hours) to help you get Python properly set up on your machine, or really for any other reason!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Autolab status
Hi all.  In response to your many inquiries:  please note that (by design) Autolab is not set up yet.  It will be by Friday.  However, you have no need for it right now!   You can definitely get a jump on hw1, even finish it, without Autolab.  You just need that for access to the autograder and then to actually submit your work.  As for the autograder, in general we will only release it late in the homework cycle to minimize any over-reliance on it.  Eventually, we will not release the autograder at all, since of course you have to learn to write code without one.  For now, though, you'll get it on Friday.  But, again, don't let that stop you from starting hw1 sooner!!!

Carpe diem.

David

The course website and hw1
Hi all. Some of you seem to have missed this.  The course website is here:
 
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~112/
 
Also, to see hw1, select the Schedule link on the left, then select "hw1" on the right.
 
Also, if you wanted to practice the hw1 material before getting started, say by doing some practice with friends (which is allowed) or CA's, I would suggest using quizzes from earlier semesters (select Syllabus, then choose your earlier semester, then select quiz1).  Just don't do this for last semester's (f13's) quiz1, since that one is in fact assigned as part of hw1.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David

Optional 15-112 tutoring sessions spoken in Chinese
Hi all.  If you speak Chinese, and if you have some concerns in lecture or the reading due to language issues, then...  One of our CA's (Lina) has kindly offered to provide 15-112 tutoring sessions spoken in Chinese.  (Thanks, Lina!)
 
The first Chinese-language 15-112 tutoring sessions are this Thursday, from 7:30pm-8:30pm and then again from 8:30pm-9:30pm.  If you are interested, please contact Lina directly by email at linal@andrew.cmu.edu .
 
I should add:  we know that there students in the course with some language concerns who speak other languages.  If a large enough group for any one language emerges, we'll try to accommodate them, too.  Otherwise, please just meet with your CA's, who of course are very happy to help with this or any other academic concern you may have.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Hi all.  This is my final post for this semester.  Together, we logged around 70,000 person hours studying, learning, and ultimately (mostly) mastering intermediate-level programming.  The proof is in the term project pudding.  As I have told you before, your projects were collectively simply wonderful, brimming with creativity and ingenuity.  Kudos!!!
 
I leave you with this thought:  you now have this great, powerful hammer.  Go find your nail.  You worked so hard to learn how to program, do something about it.  Make the world a better place.  Or a prettier place.  Or a happier place.  Or a sillier place.  I can't wait to see what comes of that!
 
And (of course) I leave you with these words:  Whatever you do, DO.  Dream big, then try your level best to make those dreams happen.  Live fully, proactively, richly, happily, healthily.  Accept your frailties, yet try to be the person you wish to be, every day, as best you can.
 
In short: Carpe diem.
 
David Hi again.  As we wrap up the semester, I wish to one last time thank the many people who put in so much effort and talent and unbelievable dedication to make this course be what it is.  Of course, I should start with the CA's, who are simply incredible.  Wow.
 
Delivering this course also includes many behind-the-scenes people to whom I am very grateful, and who all invest way more time than is reasonable to make this happen.  These include Angie Luck (my admin, master of food ordering and all manner of last-minute saving-the-day), Catharine Fichtner (the master course scheduler), Debra James Bailey (the master room scheduler), Rudy Schutzeus and Scott Wilson (last-minute huge-copy-job experts), Catherine Copetas (provider of term project awards, final exam candy, and endless good cheer), Melissa Carrozza (timesheet and payroll guru), Larry Powell (accessibility support), the amazing people in the Dean of Student Affairs Office and also those in Student Life, and of course, Tom Cortina (my dean and consultant on many course-related matters).  And of course the problem with any such list is that I've surely omitted numerous key people.  For them, both my apologies and my gratitude.
 
So, again, to everyone who helped make this happen:  THANKS!!!!

David Hi all.  The grades are now all entered into FIO, and should appear soon in SIO.  It turned out to be a very strong semester, with a median of a solid upper B (nice!).  75% scored and A or B, which is also very strong.  And while we aim for 100% scoring above an R, 98% scored above that, which is also good.  Also, the top overall semester average was 101.9 which is really awesome (of course).  We had 5 students score over 100 overall, which is surely a new record.  Great job!  All in all, from a grades perspective, this was a solid showing, which you can indeed be collectively proud of.  Kudos!!!

David Hi all.  As I recently posted:  "And I also carefully review every semester grade for every student just below the next-higher grade. I will do this over the weekend and perhaps extending into early next week."
 
I am in the middle of this work, but it takes at least 10+ hours, so I may not complete it before Monday night.  In any case, I think it's safe to predict semester grades will likely be posted for nearly all of you (except just a few edge cases) by some time on Tuesday (that's when I'll post them to FIO; it takes a few hours or up to a day, usually, to propagate to SIO).
 
Also, note:  in these case-by-case reviews, I do not lower grades.  So if you have, say, an 89.5 right now as your Course Average in Autolab, then you have an A (since, yes, we do round up).  I will not even review those cases.  I will only review the cases that fall just below 89.5, or just below 79.5, etc). 
 
Thanks for your patience.
 
David Hi Sean.  I posted:  "And I also carefully review every semester grade for every student just below the next-higher grade. I will do this over the weekend and perhaps extending into early next week."Hi all.  Some of you have noticed that your overall average grades seem to include a magic extra point.  In fact, they do.  This was added last semester, to keep things within historic norms, and somehow that one-time edit managed to survive unnoticed into this semester.  At this point, it seems wrong to take it out, and in any case, with it in, things are just where they should be.  So it stays.
 
So your overall average grade in autolab is correct.  It still does not take AMG into account, nor bubble cases, both of which will be processed this weekend.  But for now, Autolab's overall average grade computation is current and correct, so far as I know.
 
Please let me know asap if there are any irregularities or other issues.

Thanks.
 
David Hi again.  Anyone with any small grading issues on any past hw, quiz, or midterm needs to contact Andre no later than tomorrow (Saturday).  These must be resolved by Saturday night in any case.
 
As for final exams, we are very unlikely to change any grades for any subjective grading, but in the unlikely event that you find an outright grading error (say, in code tracing), we can adjust it when you find it.
 
As for term projects, we are even less likely to modify grades, as I have said in the past, given the very extensive process involved in determining these grades.  Also, again, for anyone on the bubble between an A/B or B/C or C/D, I will carefully review your term project grading before assigning a semester grade.  For that reason, please refrain from bringing any term project grading issues to me before then.  If after I post semester grades you have a concern about your term project grading, you can contact me.  We may discuss this even after this semester, and I can change semester grades even then.  It has never happened, but in theory it could if we uncover a serious grading error on your term project.
 
Finally, please refrain from making any pleas for special consideration of your semester grades. Remember, we have 350-odd students and wherever lines are drawn, there is always a student a tiny hair just above and another a tiny hair just below the line.  This means that no matter what we will have students who just *barely* miss the next-higher grade.  I cannot change this.   But I can promise that I will be completely fair and thorough about the process.
 
Thanks and carpe diem.
 
David Hi again.  The Autolab issue is resolved.  Grades are posted.  Exams are available for review, though again they will be available for the next several years, so we can hopefully avoid having 300+ of you in my OH today!  I will extend my OH to 2:30 today, and then also on Monday from noon to 2pm.
 
Some factoids about grades:
 
Semester grades are NOT completed.  I still have to do AMG.  And I also carefully review every semester grade for every student just below the next-higher grade.  I will do this over the weekend and perhaps extending into early next week.

Raw term project tp3 grades were adjusted by adding +2.  This was necessary to bring our semester average in line with historic norms.  Which now it is.

The median on the final exam was a solid 82.  Still, again to maintain historic norms, these were multipled by 85/82 to bring the adjusted median up to 85.

Autolab contains all the adjusted scores, not the raw scores.

Autolab averages also already take into account the weighting schemes, such as half-weighting your lowest 2 scores, and so forth.

Autolab does not contain anything about AMG.  That will be done later.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David To contact me, send email, do not edit my posts on Piazza.  Thanks.
David Hi all.  In a case of unfortunate timing, Autolab is having issues this morning.  This means that we are unable to make the term project grades and the final exam grades public.  Worse, some grades were public for a while, but not in fact the appropriately adjusted grades.  So if you saw your term project or final exam grade this morning, please understand that what you saw was possibly not the right computation, and it could change by perhaps +/- 5 points.  We'd make those changes but we cannot right now, since Autolab's gradebook is down.
 
I'll make another post when things are fixed.
 
Sorry for the inconvenience.
 
David Sorry if that was unclear:  you may review your graded finals starting tomorrow, once the grades are posted in Autolab.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  The main batch of finals are graded (thanks, CA's!!!), and you did quite well as a group!  Kudos!  However, we still have a small batch of finals to grade today (exam conflicts, etc).  So we cannot release final exam grades until tomorrow.  Also, the term project grades should be completed tonight.  So tomorrow you should have all your grades available in Autolab.
 
Also, for those who wish to review your graded final exams:  you may do so, but they must remain in my office (where they will remain, in fact, for at least the next several years!).  I'll have OH on Friday from noon to 2pm, and then if there is demand I may either extend Friday's OH a little bit or perhaps add more OH hours this weekend or early next week.  Of course, you can always look at your exam in January (or later) if you wish.  In the highly unlikely event that there are any grading errors that would actually influence your semester grade, we can change that grade at any time, so there's no time pressure in that sense.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  The main batch of finals are graded (thanks, CA's!!!), and you did quite well as a group!  Kudos!  However, we still have a small batch of finals to grade today (exam conflicts, etc).  So we cannot release final exam grades until tomorrow.  Also, the term project grades should be completed tonight.  So tomorrow you should have all your grades available in Autolab.
 
Also, for those who wish to review your graded final exams:  you may do so, but they must remain in my office (where they will remain, in fact, for at least the next several years!).  I'll have OH on Friday from noon to 2pm, and then if there is demand I may either extend Friday's OH a little bit or perhaps add more OH hours this weekend or early next week.  Of course, you can always look at your exam in January (or later) if you wish.  In the highly unlikely event that there are any grading errors that would actually influence your semester grade, we can change that grade at any time, so there's no time pressure in that sense.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  The main batch of finals are graded (thanks, CA's!!!), and you did quite well as a group!  Kudos!  However, we still have a small batch of finals to grade today (exam conflicts, etc).  So we cannot release final exam grades until tomorrow.  Also, the term project grades should be completed tonight.  So tomorrow you should have all your grades available in Autolab.
 
Also, for those who wish to review your graded final exams:  you may do so, but they must remain in my office (where they will remain, in fact, for at least the next several years!).  I'll have OH on Friday from noon to 2pm, and then if there is demand I may either extend Friday's OH a little bit or perhaps add more OH hours this weekend or early next week.  Of course, you can always look at your exam in January (or later) if you wish.  In the highly unlikely event that there are any grading errors that would actually influence your semester grade, we can change that grade at any time, so there's no time pressure in that sense.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  While you were (and still are!) working studiously on your finals, I just assembled and published this semester's term project gallery (which is now available via the link on the bottom left of the course website).  And I must say, once again, that I am deeply impressed with the scope, the variety, the cleverness, and the overall quality of your projects.  Great job, everyone!!!
 
Anyhow, the link is there, and so shall it remain, so take a gander when you have a chance (if you are so inclined).
 
I also hope the exam is going well for you.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  There is a rumor going round that this semester's final is going to be harder than previous semesters.  That rumor is, in a word, false.  Untrue.  Not correct.  Bogus.  Fallacious.  Poppycock.  Inaccurate.  Unfounded.  Spurious.  Delusive.  Mendacious.  And just downright wrong.
 
To a very close approximation (as close as we could get it), this final will be just as easy or hard as last semester's, or the one before that, or the one before that.
 
Also, for what it's worth, you might be comforted by this:  our goal is always to make quizzes quite challenging (but then not highly weighted), for midterm exams to be a bit less challenging than quizzes, and then for the final exam to be even a bit more doable for most of you than the midterms.  This is not to guarantee all of you will do better on the final than the midterms, but it is to say that you can expect the MEDIAN on the final to be higher than the medians on the midterms, which themselves of course were about 10 points higher than the medians on the quizzes.
 
Which is to say:  you will be fine.
 
Good luck this evening!

And...  Carpe diem.
 
David Hi all.  Apparently some of you are noticing your grade went down due to hw10, despite your not having done it.  No worries.  It's just Autolab weirdness.  We'll get it figured out asap, by tonight hopefully in any case.And I sure hope you are not still up from last night at this hour...Nothing.  :-)Just the first part, about the name.Hi all.  Here it is.  This is the video that is *guaranteed* to drive up your final exam score!  Really!
 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xbe-oIehMDM
 
Just watch it now.  And follow its (implicit) instructions carefully for the next 8 hours!  And I *guarantee* you will be happier and healthier, and that your final exam score will go up as a result.
 
Seriously.  You've worked really hard for around 4 months now.  After all that, there is nothing you can learn in the next few hours that can seriously impact your grade.  But just stay up late tonight and you can seriously hurt your grade.
 
So the time has come for you to set your studies aside and get 8 solid hours of shuteye.
 
Good night, good luck, and sleep well.  And then may you all shine brightly tomorrow.
 
Carpe diem.Well.  Say we compute hash(x) for some x in a set.  Then we change x.  And we compute hash(x) again.  What happens?  Why is this a problem?
I don't know.  Please bring this to Andre to get the points back!Because %% is just %.  It's like why \ is just .If we are looking for arrows and dots, we'd ask for them explicitly.  Otherwise, any way you show it is fine.Run it and see what happens.  How many times does it print "y"?  Hmmm.You cannot call Rect.foo() because the first parameter of foo is self.  So it is an instance method.  So you must have an instance of the Rect class to call it.   As you did above, with sq.foo().
 
However, you could define a method bar as a @classmethod (see notes for details), where the first parameter is "cls" (or sometimes written "klass"), and that is a classmethod, so it can be called without an instance, as in Rect.bar().
 
Mostly we deal with instance methods.  Class methods are usually used to construct instances, or other specialized uses.  I'd not worry too much about them.Hi again.  We're around 50% participation on FCE's.  I would sure love to hear from more of you!  Let your voice be heard!
 
Here is the form:   http://cmu.onlinecourseevaluations.com
 
Thanks again for your helpful feedback!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  We now have 95 students signed up for the gallery.  Great!!!  But I bet we can make it to 100.  :-)
 
If you are interested, this is the last call for joining the term project gallery.  Here is the form:
 
    http://tinyurl.com/112-s13-tp-gallery-signup
I'll put the new gallery online as early as tomorrow.
 
Thanks, and...  Carpe diem!As Professor Kosbie said, we don't give explicit hints about what is on or not on the final. Never ever ever!
 
But as you might be able to guess, I'm about to give a hint :P
 
I would not worry about studying the P/NP topic covered in Week 13. Even though it is an interesting CS idea, you will not be asked any questions about it on the final exam.
 
Good luck tomorrow!!!Hi all.  So the final exam just went to press (wahoo!).  And we don't give explicit hints about what is on or not on the final.
 
That said...
 
I think it'd be a really good idea if you knew how to call a super method (a method of the same name in a superclass).
 
May your entire final be super!!!  :-)Hi all.  The final tomorrow includes 20 "brief" responses.  Please, please keep it BRIEF.  As in 5-10 words.  When you give us more than that, we generally IGNORE almost all of your response, fishing for the part we are looking for.  In fact, adding more prose can LOWER your grade, making it harder for us to find the nugget that we are seeking.

So:  be very brief.  You'll move faster, and you'll probably get a better grade.

Good luck tomorrow.Hi again.  For those of you who have pre-arranged extra-time accommodations, you need to arrange for the proctoring of the final exam directly with Larry Powell's office.  If you attend the final exams we proctor, you will have the standard 180 minutes and no more.  So please contact Larry today if you have not done so already.
 
Thanks, and good luck again.Hi all.  To confirm:  our final exam is this Tuesday, 10-Dec, from 5:30pm to 8:30pm.
 
We will be in 3 separate rooms, according to andrew id, as follows:
 
DH 2210: Andrew Id's from AAA*** to KEO*** 
DH 2315: Andrew Id's from KEP*** to SSG*** 
DH 2302: Andrew Id's from SSH*** to ZZZ***

Please be certain to show up to your assigned room!

Here are some important exam-day logistics:
 
Plan to show up at least a few minutes early.
Latecomers may take the exam but their exam will end at 8:30pm regardless.

Sit every other seat.

Bring your physical andrew id card to the exam.

You must present your andrew id card to submit your exam, where the proctor receiving your exam will do a quick id check based on your andrew id photo.  So you know, this id check will occur even if the proctor knows you well.
 
Good luck!  And... Carpe diem.Hi again.  Turns out I need Wednesday to grade term projects and finals.  So:  my OH schedule this week is as follows:
 
Mon:  10am-11am
Tue:  noon-3pm
Thu: noon-2pm
Fri: noon-2pm
 
Thanks, and carpe diem.Hi all.  Unfortunately, term project grading is going to take longer than anticipated.  Given how hard you worked on them, and how much they are worth, it is much more important that we do the grading accurately more than quickly.  We hope to have the grades available by mid-week, roughly when we also hope to have the final exam grades available.  We'll see.  We'll do our best.
 
Thanks, and good luck on the final!Hi all.  Thanks to those who attended today's optional lecture.  We had good fun writing HALF a new programming language.  So...  We need to meet Wednesday for the second half.  Thing is, I unfortunately cannot make the time we agreed upon (sorry).  So:  we need to take a Doodle poll tonight to determine when next to meet.
 
For those who attended today, if you also wish to attend the second half, please fill out this doodle poll now:  http://www.doodle.com/ur3t4gpfarnifad5
 
Please list your andrew id as your name, and please list all the times you could possibly make it.
 
Thanks!Hi all.  Word is that attendance at yesterday's review sessions and OH was very light.  This either means everyone is poised to ace the final (woohoo!), or....  Maybe just maybe folks haven't quite gotten into final exam prep mode.
 
I understand the afterglow of term project mode.  You worked really hard (you did!), and you created great projects (ditto!).  And now you want some well-earned time off.
 
Only, it just can't be that way.  The registrar had other ideas when he scheduled our final exam.  It's just 3 days from now!
 
So: get back into the groove and start prepping in earnest for our final.  As a reminder, here is the final exam review session schedule.
 
Of course, there are other courses to worry about, too.  You have to walk and chew gum at the same time here.  You have to attend to those courses and also attend to our upcoming final.  And also, critically, attend to yourself, especially getting enough sleep.
 
This is a lot to ask from you (though neither the first nor the last time CMU will do that).  But you can do it!
 
We are almost done.  Just 3 more days.  Let's finish strong!!! 
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Thanks to the many of you who volunteered to help with Monday's Hour of Code.  I very much appreciate your kindness.  I randomly chose two volunteers, who have been contacted.  To the rest, thanks again!Hi all (and sorry for the spam; lots of announcements this morning!).  As the subject says, we'll have the last optional lecture of the semester tomorrow (Saturday), from 1:30 to 3:30pm in WEH 7500.
 
We'll write our own little programming language interpreter.
 
Should be good fun!  :-)
 
Carpe diem.Hi all. Monday is the Computer Science Education "Hour of Code" for pre-college students.  And I am seeking some volunteers to join me in helping a nearby high school (Pittsburgh Science and Technology Academy, in Oakland, near Pitt's bookstore) with their "Hour of Code" activities.
 
The "hour" really runs from noon to 2:45pm.   Plus, the school is a 15-20 minute walk away.  And I'll throw in some Razzy Fresh on the way back for whoever volunteers.  So that all adds up to probably 11:30am to 3:30pm.
 
I hope we can find a couple volunteers for this.  Please email me if you would do this.  I'll post back here when we have enough.  And thanks!!!Hi all.  Please note that my OH today will be half an hour later than usual, running from 12:30 to 2:30pm.  Also, I'll have to leave soon after 2:30pm, though.
 
I'll also have OH next week, on this schedule (which is also posted on the course Google calendar):
  Mon:  10am-11am  (please note the early time)
  Tue:  12pm-3pm (or later)
  Wed: 12pm-2pm (or later)
  Thu:  12pm-2pm (or later)
 
At this point, my last scheduled OH of the semester will be on Thursday of next week.  I'll have more, of course, as needed.  And we can always set up more meetings if needed after then, too.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  As we approach the finish line for this semester, we already have to get the wheels spinning for next semester's 15-112.  And for that, we very much welcome your feedback.  You just lived this course, and you collectively know best what we can do to make it even better for future students.  And we most definitely do read all your feedback carefully and take it all to heart.
 
Of course, there are FCE's for this, and I do hope you all take the time to fill out the FCE forms:
   http://cmu.onlinecourseevaluations.com
f you've not done so already, now is a great time to do that (carpe diem!).
 
But FCE forms do not provide enough room for the level of feedback we are seeking.  We would love specifics.  What did you find especially helpful and enjoyable?  What did you find to be especially unhelpful or unenjoyable?  If you ran the zoo, what changes would you make?
 
We may not change everything overnight, but we definitely do make (sometimes quite large) changes in direct response to student feedback.  So please do let us know your thoughts.
 
For this type of feedback, I ask that you please email me or come to my OH and discuss it.  If you'd rather be anonymous, that's fine of course.  In that case, please slide a typed sheet under my door some night this week, or place it in an envelope with my name on it and slide it under Angie Luck's door (GHC 6006).
 
Whatever you do, please do let your voice be heard.  I want to hear it, and to think hard about how to best incorporate your voice into the future 15-112.
 
I loved working with you all this semester.  I very much hope you enjoyed the semester, too.  But in any case, I very much wish to get your feedback and to think hard about how we can improve the course for the future.
 
Meanwhile, of course, there is also the final exam to think about.  It's just a few days away now.  Let's all do our part to finish as strong as possible.
 
Thanks, good luck, and carpe diem.Hi all.  Here is the plan for recitation tomorrow.  First, since we can, we'll let everyone sleep in (CA's included).  So there is no recitation at either 8:30 or 9:30 tomorrow.  If you have one of those times, you may go to any recitation after that all day long.
 
Also, we will only have one room going:  5205.  If you regularly meet in 5201, please go across the hall.

Next, recitation tomorrow is just for quiz-retakes, to return midterms, and to chat with CA's.  Attendance is optional.
 
As for the quiz-retakes, we'll administer quiz6-retake on the half-hours (10:30, 11:30,..., 4:30) and quiz7-retake on the hours (11, 12, 1, 2, ...).  Of course, you can only take either one at most once.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Truly, it was just awesome seeing so many great projects.  Your hard work, and ingenuity, and fabulous results are an inspiration to me.

Thanks!  And great job!!!

And carpe diem!
 
And good luck on the final!  :-)Hi all.  There are two (and only two) university-approved reasons for a make-up final:
 
1) Another final at the exact same time; or
 
2) Three finals in 25 hours.  (Not three finals in 26 hours, mind you.)
 
If you qualify under either of these two conditions, and so wish to take a make-up final, then please send me an email asap, and by tomorrow (Friday) night in any case.  In that email, list *all* the times you are available to take an alternate 15-112 final on Wednesday and Thursday of next week.  Also, list which of the two conditions you are facing, and list the conflicting courses and the times of their finals.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  Today should be good fun!  And while the main point of today is to share and learn from each other's experiences, this is an important and constructive pedagogical exercise, too.  And so attendance is required (and we encourage though do not explicitly require to you attend the lecture you are assigned, though you may also attend both lectures today if you wish).
 
And to reward your attendance, we'll make this worth 2.5 points on your deliverable #3.   Free points!  What a deal!  :-)
 
See you soon.Hi all.  While we're celebrating your great work on all of your term projects, I hope that many (all?) of you would consider listing your project in our online gallery.  If you are interested, please fill out this form (now, ideally):
   http://tinyurl.com/112-s13-tp-gallery-signup
 
As the form says:  This form is optional, though we encourage everyone to participate. Please fill out this form if you would like your project listed in the 15-112-s13 term project gallery. As you know, this is a great resource for future 15-112 students to be inspired and motivated by your work. It also is a chance for you to get some recognition for all your hard work and great results!

The gallery is open to anyone in the course, regardless of your grade. In fact we encourage a variety in all ways.
 
 
Also, while most students historically have elected to include their names (which we encourage), you may elect to list your project anonymously if that is your preference.
 
In any case, thanks to everyone for supporting the term project gallery. And congrats again on a huge job collectively done very well!!!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  The two dozen or so students who will be presenting tomorrow have now been contacted by email.  However, I must say....  This was basically an impossible task.  There are literally dozens and dozens of projects that should be presented tomorrow.  Not just because they were so well done, which they were, but because they were so clever and original and interesting.
 
I wish we had the time for all of them.  But unfortunately we don't (sorry).
 
But at least we'll get to see over a dozen interesting projects in each lecture.  Note that the 9am presenters are different from the 10:30am presenters, for anyone wanting to attend both sessions.  :-)
 
In any case, congratulations to everyone on completing your term projects.  Woohoo!
 
And now you get to relax at least for a day before setting your sights on the upcoming final exam (which is on Tuesday!).  Kudos!!!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  With the term projects due in 10 hours, now is the time to be calmly wrapping up.  Do not panic.  Do not add new features.  Do not add anything.  It's time to tidy up what you have, package it as nicely as you can, and submit it.  Best to submit by 7pm or even earlier, leaving time in case of any unforeseen issues.  Here are some A's for some recent Q's:
 
Q: Is there any way the deadline can be extended beyond 9pm tonight?
A: No.  Not even by a few minutes.  Submit by 9pm.  Whatever you have, submit it by then.  Even if it is missing key parts, that is the deadline. We will not accept late submissions by email, or late partial submissions (say, a link to a video), so don't work on it past 9pm.  That's it.  9pm.
 
Q: Do we have to include our user study notes from yesterday's class in the writeup?
A: Yes.
 
Q: Do we have to include *all* the libraries and modules we used?
A: Actually, no, but almost yes.  In general, yes, you need to include modules, since you may use obscure modules that we have no way of finding let alone installing.  However, you do not have to include the most mainstream/common modules, which include:  PyGame, PIL, numpy, scipy, OpenCV, pyQT, pyWindows, and Django.  If in doubt, though, include it.  And in any case, be certain to list all the modules you used and how to find and install them (this goes in your readme file).
 
Q: Is tomorrow's lecture required?
A: Yes.  But it should be good fun!  :-)
 
Q: Will some students present their work tomorrow?
A: Yes.  That is the main event!

Q: How will we know if we are presenting?
A: Right at 9pm tonight, the CA's will assiduously review every submission, choosing what they think are the best one or two (or perhaps three) from their group and submitting them to me within the hour.  I'll then carefully (but quickly) review all those and determine who will present tomorrow.  I will send email to each presenter.  That email should go out by midnight tonight.  None of this has any bearing on the deadline, which is 9pm.
 
Q: Are we required to present if contacted?
A: No, but strongly encouraged.  It is good fun, plus it's a very useful educational experience for your peers to share in your work.
 
Q: Is it possible to determine the best projects in so short a time?
A: Probably not.  So there is unfortunately a good chance that a couple top projects might not make it to the presentation round.  Sorry for that: it's a necessary by-product of the very tight timing.  Also, note that this has no bearing on the actual grading process, where we are sure to find those missed gems and give them their well-deserved top grades.
 
Q: Do students actually ask all these questions?
A: Nearly all of them.
 
Carpe diem.
Hi all.  Please see the letter below from Greg Kesden regarding the Stehlik Teaching Award (it also mentions the Perlis Award, but that's not really for 15-112 CA's).  If you are so motivated, please send an email directly to Greg Kesden (as per his email below) for any 15-112 CA's you would like to nominate for the Stehlik Award.  Of course, this is entirely optional.  Thank you!Hi all.  So here we go, the last few days.   The best advice I can give is this:  Don't Panic.  I have seen most of your projects, and they are collectively really promising.  Bear in mind the reality here that you only had a few weeks.  We don't expect perfection, and neither should you.  So don't panic if things aren't perfect.  Just make them as good as you practically can, given the time you can invest, while maintaining your balance.  Get your sleep, maintain your other grades, and so on.
 
And have some fun with it.  The time to push for major new features is basically over (except for the iterative design pass tomorrow).  Now you should be transitioning to bug fixes, polishing here and there, and preparing your video and your grading presentation.  Basically, you should be changing gears from producing a project to packaging it as nicely as possible.
 
No matter what your project is, no matter what grade it might earn, you can package it as nicely as possible.
 
And then there's this:  ac-cen-tu-ate the positive (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fZUmAbi0Vm4).  Really.  Even if your project has some usability issues, and some key bugs, it still is a large-scale project the likes of which you presumably could not realistically attempt just a few months ago.  So even if it is not everything you had hoped for, it still can serve to prove that you have intermediate level coding skills, that you have satisfied the exit criteria for 15-112, and that you are ready for what lies ahead.  These are all very good things that you have worked long and hard for.  Kudos for that!
 
So: polish up your projects.  Make them shine as brightly as you can.  But keep things in perspective, and don't panic, and try to enjoy these last few days of coding this semester.

Carpe diem.Hi yet again.  It's the morning of Piazza posts.  :-)
 
The quiz retake schedule for this week is as such:
 
* Quiz5-retake will be tomorrow in lecture.  Of course, it's optional, as all quiz-retakes are.
 
* Quiz6-retake and quiz7-retake will both be in recitation on Friday.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  It is important for everyone to bear in mind that there are no extensions on the term project deadline.  It is 9pm Wednesday night.  No exceptions.
 
Please budget your time accordingly.  You are strongly encouraged to submit well before the 9pm deadline.  Say, by 6pm.  Or even earlier. Say, by Tuesday night!
 
However...  If it is approaching 8:30pm Wednesday and you realize that you cannot pull it all together, then simply submit what you have, whatever it is.  Just submit *something* by 9pm so we can give you as many points as possible.
 
Please do not make the mistake of waiting past 9pm (after which Autolab will not accept submissions) and emailing your submission to your grader or to me.  We will not accept any emailed submissions nor any late submissions.
 
Also, be sure to take into account that hardware fails.  Again, plan accordingly, and meet the deadline.
 
This deadline is very well publicized.  You know it is coming.  Please be certain to meet it.
 
Good luck with it.Hi again.  As we discussed last week in lecture, tomorrow's class is required.  We will take attendance, and it will count towards your term project grade (in that being there will not add points, but not being there will result in -2.5 points on your final deliverable).
 
Points aside, tomorrow should definitely help you (as it is intended to do!).  Note that iterative design is a required element of the term project.  We understand, of course, that you have little time and so can only user test and iterate so much.  Well:  tomorrow is the perfect opportunity!  Bring your (fully charged) laptop to class, ready to demo your project.  Then, for one hour of class, you'll each serve as user study test subjects for each other.
 
How to run a (quick and informal) user study?  Easy.   Give them a task to do and let them do it without your interference.  They should be speaking the whole time, simply vocalizing their thoughts.  You should be furiously recording what they say.  The notes you take will help you improve your project.  You'll also submit the notes (typed, of course) as evidence of your user studies.  When taking the notes, do not editorialize or analyze.  Just record.  Later, after the session, you should analyze and reflect and decide how you would change your project based on what you just experienced.
 
And then...  Do at least one or two of those changes.  Don't do anything large-scale.  it's too late for that.  But do make some kind of iterative design, so what you submit on Wednesday is an improvement over what you had on Tuesday, courtesy of the user studies.  And of course document these changes for your grader.
 
Iterative design does not usually happen under such time constraints.  In a more realistic setting, you'd have the time to make even fairly major changes as needed, and then do another pass of user studies, and to continue in this mode until you converge on a winning product.  Though, truth be known, web apps have changed this quite a bit, since now you can release web-based product updates in real time.  So companies often release products earlier (perhaps much earlier) than they would have, and continue refining them while already released.  Even so, you could just consider that entire period to be the iterative user design phase.  So it's still pretty much the same process.
 
In any case, we don't have time for that.  So we do a hyper-compressed version.  What they might call the "iterative design process", we will call "Tuesday".
 
Good luck with it.
Hi all.  I will have OH this week from noon to 2pm each day.  I may not be able to run too much past 2pm on some days, so please plan accordingly.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  At my direction, the CA's are about to start their first anti-plagiarism pass on the term projects.  The second anti-plagiarism pass will occur after the complete projects are submitted.
 
in recent semesters, we have unfortunately uncovered about one serious term project plagiarism violation per semester.  This results in failing the course and possible additional penalties at the university level.  It is a serious misjudgment we strongly wish for you to avoid.
 
This email is an attempt to drive that rate down to zero this semester.  If you were considering cheating, don't.  If you did, undo it this second by sending an email right now this second to your CA, cc to me, withdrawing your submission (which is not the same thing as admitting guilt; it's just electively taking a 0 for whatever reasons you might have).  Taking a 0 on deliverable 1 and/or deliverable 2 is a much lesser consequence than what would otherwise occur, and would still leave room for you to get some points on the main deliverable (though of course only on those portions which are in fact originally your own).
 
Once we do the anti-plagiarism pass, if we uncover any violations, it is past the point where you can electively withdraw a submission.
 
And please be sure to cite thoroughly and very clearly.  We need to know what code is yours, and how much of it is yours.
 
And, finally, I will conclude as I often do in these posts:  i totally understand that nearly all of you are doing this the right way, and that these posts are for the very small subset of you who would consider such behavior.  For the rest of you, I apologize for this distraction.
 
Good luck down the homestretch!  And...  Carpe diem.Hi all.  We are four days from the deadline (wow, time flies!).  It is well past the point where changing projects would make sense.  And so even if you are struggling at this time, you should plan on taking your current project as far as it can go.
 
Also note that students may not electively change their assigned projects.  That requires mentor approval, and the deadline for that was last Monday.  Even if you do a fair bit of work in a new direction, we cannot accept it.  So stick with your current project and do your best.
 
Good luck with it.Hi all.  Today is a day to remember, a day to celebrate, or at least a day to sleep in!!!  Because today is....
 
* The day Internet Explorer 2.0 was released
From http://csta.acm.org/includes/Gadget.html:  "November 28, 1995:  Internet Explorer 2.0 is Released.  Somewhat late to the web browser market, this version supports SSL, background audio and supports twelve languages."
 
* A Day to Commemorate the Developer of the First User Error Message
From http://www.computerhistory.org/tdih/: "November 28, 1954:  Herbert Bright, developer of one of the first FORTRAN user programs (and consequently, the first error message), dies at 67. Bright had been a promoter of security through data encryption, as well as a research engineer at AT&T Laboratories. He also held various executive offices in the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM)."

And of perhaps even greater historical significance, today is....
 
* The Day Magellan Reached the Pacific
From http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/.
 
* The Day CMU Beat Notre Dame
From http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carnegie_Mellon_University: "On November 28, 1926, the 6?2 Carnegie Tech football team shutout Knute Rockne's undefeated Notre Dame Fighting Irish 19?0 at Forbes Field. It would be the only loss for the Irish all season and only the second time they allowed a touchdown that season.[68] The game was ranked the fourth-greatest upset in college football history by ESPN."
 
And, of course, it is also...
 
* Thanksgiving
Today is a day to celebrate the joy and comforts of good food with good friends and family.  And of course some good football, too (Go Steelers!).  Whether you are at home with your family, on campus with your "CMU family", or anywhere else with anyone else, I hope you take the time today to set aside for a while the whirlwind that is CMU academics, to spend some time relaxing and enjoying the company of others.
 
Happy Thanksgiving!!!Hi all.  Between now and Sunday, please limit your Piazza posts to between 8-10pm Pittsburgh time.  That's when you will get responses.
 
Also, please remember to ask specific questions (for example, don't just post walls of code and say "there's a bug").  And "where's my bug" is not a question we will answer.  Why not?  Because knowing how to effectively debug is a critical skill that you must learn in this course.  There is no way you can use your 15-112 programming skills in the future unless you also have rock-solid 15-112 debugging skills to match them!  And so we would be doing you no favors if we did your debugging for you.
 
Good luck!Hi all.  As usual, optional-mini-hw10 is entirely SOLO.
Cheers.Hi all.  For those wishing to do the optional mini-hw10, here it is:
 
Place all your answers in hw10.py.  Include non-code answers in triple-quotes at the top of the file.
 
#1) Do exercise1 (Yahtzee) from s11-hw5
 
#2) Multiply 123 x 456 using the lattice multiplication algorithm, and also using the ancient Egyptian algorithm, that we covered in lecture (and available on Wikipedia's "multiplication algorithm" page).  Find a way to represent your lattice in a text file.
 
Good luck, and have fun!Hi all.  I'm here, and I'll have OH from now until 4pm.
 
See (some of) you soon.Hi all.  Due to the Thanksgiving holiday, the CA's and I will not have office hours on Wednesday through Saturday inclusive.  We'll resume normal operations on Sunday.
 
We will continue to staff Piazza in that time, but only from 8pm to 10pm each night.  So please limit your Piazza posts to those times (again, just from Wednesday through Saturday).
 
Also, you can still email your mentors directly, especially with mentor-type questions (and not so much with debugging-type questions, which given the size and complexity of your projects now, are not really answerable over email in a few minutes anyhow).
 
The term project is meant to prove that you are capable independent intermediate programmers.  This stretch without heavy support is the perfect chance for you to do just that!
 
Good luck!!!Hi all.  While most of you seem to be using generally good style on your term projects, some of you are very much not doing that.  Of course, we'll grade for style.  But that's the not the biggest reason to use good style.
 
The biggest reason to use good style is because now that you are working on medium-scale projects, not using good style is, well, insane.
 
You will make your code bloated and incomprehensible.  And, especially, undebuggable.
 
And that is the exact symptom I am seeing.  Some students are coming to office hours looking for debugging help, but really there's just no way to penetrate the thicket of their style-deprived code.  So we can't help them until they first fix their vast style issues.  Really, it can (and does) get that bad.
 
So: use good style!  We didn't teach you good style for aesthetic purposes.  We taught you good style for sheer practicality.  It works.  It saves you from endless frustration.  Use it!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  As the subject says...
 
Also, I am pretty sure I can have OH tomorrow afternoon, maybe around 3pm or 4pm or so, just I won't know the time until then.  I'll post when i do know.
 
Carpe diem.Hi again.  While most of you are indeed making fine progress on your term projects, a few of you are not making sufficient progress at this time for us to be sure you will be able to finish by next week's deadline.  And in some of those cases, the lack of progress may be due to the nature of the project itself, and a more mainstream project might give you a much better chance at success.  And so:  in these few cases, today your mentor may direct you to a new topic assignment.
 
Please understand that this has nothing to do with your effort, which may be substantial, nor with how great your project could eventually be.  It is a practical (if sometimes difficult) decision about where you are right now, and how little time remains until the deadline.  Because changing projects right now, today, still leaves time to complete a new project to a passing level.  But today is the last day that that is likely to be true.  So we have to make these decisions today.
 
Also note that these new topic assignments are not optional (sorry).  But they are appeal-able.  If you are in this group, I would be happy to meet and discuss your case.  It is likely I would agree with your mentor about the new topic assignment, but even so, I'd be happy to discuss it (and perhaps change the assignment in a way you find more palatable).  In any case, history suggests that without this policy, a small but non-zero number of you would outright fail the term project and consequently perhaps the entire course.  We very much wish to avoid those outcomes for every one of you.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
 
Addendum:  if you do change projects, you get 100% of the credit for everything you have done so far.  All the effort and all the results.  So it's not starting over in that sense.Hi all.  I hope you are continuing to make great progress on your TP's as we head towards deliverable #2's deadline tonight.  Speaking of which, some students have asked how you should package the "working demo".  Basically, it will be a live demo you give during deliverable #2 grading with your mentor.
 
Specifically, you do not need to make a video yet, that's only for the final submission.  You don't even have to include any screenshots of the working demo.
 
Instead, just submit your code along with some explanation as to how to run the demo (and along with all the other parts of the deliverable as described in the term project spec).  For some of you, your mentor may not be able to run your demo (since it may require custom hardware or perhaps some modules they don't have).  No worries, since again you will demo your project in person at your deliverable #2 grading session.
 
Good luck with it.
 
And....  Carpe diem.Hi all.  I'll have OH today from noon until 2:45pm.  Tomorrow, I cannot have midday OH (sorry), but I will try to hopefully have some later in the day, perhaps starting around 4pm.  I say perhaps because it depends on how an off-campus meeting goes (it may run quite long), and also on the weather (a big snow storm is perhaps going to roll in tomorrow).  But today is definite.
 
See (some of) you soon.Hi all.  My mother passed away last night, so I have to travel tomorrow to Las Vegas for the funeral (which will be on Monday though I may have to stay through Tuesday).  I do not have an exact return flight yet, but it will likely be Tuesday evening.   I should be back on a normal schedule by some time on Wednesday (and will post here when I know for sure).   I will also unfortunately probably not be able to keep up with my inbox or Piazza very well in that time, and ask for your understanding (thanks).
 
So: for the next several days, please direct any routine course-related issues to Andre (thanks, Andre!), and please direct any pressing faculty-level issues that cannot await my return, should they arise, to my Dean, Tom Cortina (tcortina@cs.cmu.edu) (and thanks, Tom).
 
Given that we are now in term project mode, this will not heavily impact our schedule.  Even so, the tentative plan is for Tuesday's lecture to now be optional but highly encouraged.  Andre (or one of the other senior CA's) will first lead a session on "Miscellaneous Python / Tkinter Demos" and perhaps a very quick coverage (just 5 or 10 minutes each) on "Modules" and "File / Web IO".  Then a good chunk of time will be saved for you to discuss your term projects, and especially your storyboards, with each other.  This is a very useful activity, so you get other people giving you ideas about how you might improve your project.  And, again, it's optional.  Plus, I said "tentative".  Andre can modify the plan as he deems appropriate, and will post here accordingly.
 
The optional mini-hw10 deadline will be pushed back to after Thanksgiving, so you'll have plenty of time to do it if you wish.  I'll post more about that later this week.
 
The make-up quizzes will still occur later this week as planned.  Maybe Thursday night or Friday in recitation.  Again, I'll post more here later.
 
I apologize for any inconvenience these changes may cause.  Again, I should be back on a normal schedule by Wednesday at the latest.
 
In the meantime, I hope you are all making solid progress and especially having some good fun with your term projects.  Life is too short not to enjoy the ride.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.   Thanks to a truly Herculean effort by our CA's, the midterms were graded by 3am this morning.  Thanks, CA's!
 
The midterms themselves cannot be returned today, since a few students away on university-approved absences (such as athletic and academic contests) will take the exam on Monday.  Also for this reason, please be sure (of course) not to discuss any aspect of the exam with those students until after then.
 
The results were ok if not exceptional, especially considering that some of the questions were duplicates from those you've already seen.  In any case, after a 5.5-point course-wide bump (which is reflected in the scores in Autolab), the median is 75.  Three students tied for the top score of 102, with two more right behind at 101.  Nice job!
 
Note that there is a growing gap between the overall course median (87, which is very high) and the combined midterm medians (80, which is spot on).  This suggests a bit of grade inflation has creeped in (mainly due to the quiz retake policy, so our quiz median is a full 10 points over historic norms, and rising!).  The final exam may serve to correct that a bit.  We'll see.  In any case, I do hope people with lower-than-hoped-for midterm2 grades take that as an extra incentive to master the intermediate material in preparation for the final, where you can be sure it will be heavily represented.
 
In any case...  We are now done with the intermediate programming portion of the course.  Whew!
 
And so we set our sights on term projects now.  I hope you all are off to a great jump on those.  This weekend is a crucial step in that process.  Time is going to fly over the next 3 weeks.  Now is the time to get a serious jump on your project.  Even though you only need some "code artifacts" by your first deadline, you will be in a much better position if you have more than that, and are converging on a working demo of some major portion of your project.  That would be the ideal.
 
Also, do not spend very much time wondering about what you are going to do.  That time has passed.  The time to blue-sky has passed.  Now is the time to DO.  Pick a direction and run with it.
 
Also, if you get stuck on a technology, you can drive Polya in reverse and engineer your way around it.  That is:  in a perfect world, you would make a perfect design, and then decide all the technologies you needed to implement that design, and proceed from there.  In our messy and imperfect world, sometimes you are limited instead by the technologies available to you (maybe you cannot get a module to install, or you can't seem to make it work for some reason, or, or, or....).  So you can just pick the technologies you can confidently use, and drive the design backwards to be sure it uses those technologies.
 
Same goes with techniques.  Maybe you are doing some hand gesture input, controlling a game by moving your fingers in front of a webcam.  Well, if some gestures that you "need" are hard to recognize, then instead figure out those gestures you can reliably recognize, and drive that backwards, changing your design to use those instead.
 
This is the real-world bi-directional interplay of Polya's steps that occurs under serious resource limitations.  And you all have serious resource limitations, as we are just 19 days from the term project due date.  That's not much time.  So be clever, and ingeniously engineer your way around any obstacles you cannot readily resolve.
 
Good luck!  And.... Carpe diem!Hi all.  Anyone who has pre-authorized accommodations for tomorrow's midterm should contact Larry Powell today (now, really) to make appropriate arrangements.  Thanks.Hi all.  I need to move my OH today (sorry).  I'm aiming for starting at 6pm, running to, say, 7:30pm.  See (some of) you then.Hi all.  The mentor assignment lottery is complete.  By our metric, we came within 6% of optimal.  So the heavy majority of you received your first choice.  Woohoo.  In any case, you should be hearing from your assigned mentor this morning, and you should set up your first 10-minute meeting with them by this Friday night.
 
Good luck on your projects, and of course good luck tomorrow, too.  :-)

Carpe diem.Hi all.  Here is the form that each of you should fill out:
   http://tinyurl.com/15-112-f13-mentor-form
 
Given the timing, you have until 11:59pm tonight to fill it out.  I'll run the lottery first thing in the morning.  You should hear from your mentor via email soon after that.
 
If you do not fill out the form by 11:59pm tonight, you will be assigned a random mentor.  Also, once assignments are made, all mentors will be at capacity, and so we cannot accommodate requests to reassign to other mentors.  So please fill out the form!  Thanks.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.In response to some questions I've received on the matter:  All lectures have required attendance, today included.  Today is the one-and-only day we cover the term project extensively.  Seeing how important this is, grade-wise and other-wise, you would not want to miss it!  Also, maybe we'll do a small, easy question from the midterm.  Or maybe not.  In any case, you should be there.Hi all.   So here we go, the last night of the last (major) hw of the semester.  This is it!!!   Rumor has it that OH is packed and the queue runs deep.  We've called in reserves, so some help is on the way.   Even so, please understand that there's only so much the CA's can do.  Debugging recursion can be just plain nasty, and can take a long time in any case. But of course the CA's will do their level best (as always!).
 
Also, there's this:  we simply cannot slip the deadline past tonight.  But I suppose we could use those last 2 hours, so:
 
Hw9 is now due at 11:59pm tonight.  I hope that helps at least a bit.
 
One thing, though: our staffing plan ran until 10pm tonight.  We'll try to provide some extra extra staffing until 11:59pm, but it probably won't be a full complement.  Again, we'll do our best.
 
This is it.  Do your best.  And then you're done with the big hw's for this semester.   Whew!!!!
 
Good luck with it.Hi all.  Hard to believe, but we are approaching the homestretch.  And it's time for us to start planning for next semester.  Amazing how time flies.
 
Looking ahead, here are two opportunities for our top students.  If you are not among that group, no worries, these opportunities may also be for you, too, only sometime after next semester.  Meanwhile, you should first take another CS course or two to better prepare for them, if you are interested.  And, of course, you should shine in those classes.  :-)
 
Opportunity #1:  CA for 15-112
The CA's are the backbone of this course.  They are amazing, and this course simply could not exist in anything like its current form without their daily dedication to their students, to each other, and to the course.  And the only way to maintain a great staff of CA's is to attract a large pool of great CA applicants.  Understand that this is a highly-competitive position, with fewer than 1-in-5 applicants accepted.  But if you have excellent grades (say, about 95 or higher on the first midterm and 95 or higher overall average at this point, though those numbers are not etched in stone), and (just as critically) you are a very strong "people person", and (again just as critically) you love to teach and to help people, and you love the idea of sitting in a room with a bunch of other CA's grading for hours on end (a sheer joy for some people, but probably not for most), and you want to learn this material much better than you could by just taking this course, then please let me know of your interest and we'll meet for a first-round interview.  This is all happening now, so this is the time to Carpe some Diem, if you are interested.
 
Opportunity #2: Take 15-239
In the spring, Bernardine Dias and I are co-teaching 15-239: Software Development for Social Good.  Ordinarily, we would want only sophomores or higher, with numerous CS courses under their belt, especially 15-237 (front-end web apps).  However, 15-237 was not offered last semester (nor next semester, as it returns in the fall), so that pipeline is a bit lean, which perhaps creates an opportunity for a select few of you.  To be clear, 15-239 is really just for proficient intermediate-or-advanced programmers and designers who can handle large amounts of autonomy in a non-lecture-format team-based project course.  I would think that maybe, just maybe, a small number of our top students may be able to handle it at this point, prior to taking more courses.  If you think you might be qualified, and if that interests you, please let me know asap.  As for everyone else, we of course very much encourage you to take more CS courses, to take 15-237 in the fall, and then to join us for 15-239 in spring 2015 or beyond.  I assure you that there will remain more Social Good to do whenever you are interested and able!  Thanks!
 
Carpe diem.it's ok for that function to be a non-recursive "wrapper" that calls a separate function that is recursive.  This way, that separate function could return more than just the largest file (such as, say, a tuple of the largest file and its size, hint, hint, hint).Hi all.  It would not be acceptable to "solve" findLargestFile by getting a list of all the files using listFiles from the course website, and then iterating over all those.  That is not an inherently recursive solution.
 
You must write a function that properly uses recursion in the spirit and style intended.
 
Put another way:  say there are N files somewhere in the tree below the root path where you are searching.  It is unacceptable to create a list of length N just as a convenience.  Instead, each level should just return ITS largest file (for that level and recursively all levels below it).
 
Please see me or a CA if you are unsure what this means.
 
Good luck with it.Hi all.  About 10 of you had pre-approved (from me) absences from today's quizzes (mostly for traveling to job interviews, and good luck with those!).  If you are in that group, you need to take the second half of the quiz during my Monday OH.  No need to email to arrange this, just please show up then.  Thanks.Hi again.  The only time I can do it this weekend is just before the hw9 deadline, which is an awful time.  Plus, I think many of you would probably be (rightfully) focusing on hw9 and then midterm prep, so we'd probably not get very good attendance at an optional/advanced lecture this weekend.
 
So:  there is no optional/advanced lecture this weekend.
 
Next weekend, post-midterm, we'll do it for sure.  I think we'll double up on two really nice topics then, too.
 
More later in the week.
 
For now, good luck with the hw and the midterm prep.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  As noted on the 15-122 Events Calendar ( http://tinyurl.com/15-112-f13-calendar),  I will have OH next week every day Mon-Fri from noon to 2pm.  I would expect Mon-Wed to focus on midterm prep, and Thu-Fri to focus on term projects, but all OH are always open to anyone for anything.
 
Carpe diem.Hi again.  I am obliged to send messages about cheating and such, but it's no fun at all.  Worse, it really is a sideshow.  It should not (and does not) distract you or me from the main event.  Namely, the overwhelming majority of you who are very busy trying to learn this material, as well as manage your other courses, and many other commitments of all kinds.
 
I know that most of you do not and would not cheat.  Collectively, you are very dedicated, hard-working, and high-achieving students.  You are curious, probing, intellectual, comical, whimsical, caring, thoughtful, and downright fascinating.  You are what makes this job so great.  It is a joy working with you.  So thank you for that.  :-)

Carpe diem.Hi all.  We just had our second case this semester of copying during a quiz yesterday.  The offenders now face serious penalties.  Of course, I am telling you this in the hopes that anyone considering such actions in the future instead reconsiders and does the right thing.
 
Never mind the ethics (though yes, they are there), this is just plain poor decision making from a game theory perspective:  To save a few meager points on a quiz, are you willing to risk failing this course, and perhaps even more severe penalties from the Dean of Student Affairs (up to suspension or even expulsion from the university)?   Since each quiz is worth about 1% of a semester grade, and the two lowest quizzes are worth even half that, and we're only talking about a portion of the quiz points anyhow, we're talking about risking everything you've done in this course for perhaps 0.1% or less of a semester grade advantage.  That's just absurd.  And irrational.
 
In any case, we do monitor for such events, both during the quiz and especially during grading.  And when detected, we do pursue such cases with vigor.  We owe that to everyone involved, including the offenders, but especially including the 99+% of students who are not offenders.  We do this to preserve the integrity of the course and of the institution, so that your transcripts actually mean what they say.  So that employers take your transcripts seriously.  So that you get what you paid for, and heck, you paid a lot for it.  We simply will not let some cheaters deprive you of your investment's value.
 
Bottom line:  do not cheat.
 
Thanks.Though it's fun to see what people are coming up with in ascii art and such...  :-)Hi all.  The callWithLargeStack code seems to not work properly anymore on recent releases of OS X, and never worked well on Linux.  Sigh.
 
This isn't a huge problem, but it does make the floodFill examples fail.  Don't worry about the pixel-based one.  As for the grid-based one, you can fix this by simply not using callWithLargeStack.  To do this, in mousePressed, replace these lines:
 
if (doFlood):
    floodFillWithLargeStack(row, col)
 
with these lines:
 
if (doFlood):
    floodFill(row, col, canvas.data.fillColor)
 
Sorry for the confusion.

Carpe diem.Hi all.  Seeing as we have over 10x more students in this course than seats in any recitation, we unfortunately cannot accommodate anyone taking the quiz except during their normally assigned recitation.  Please plan accordingly.
Thanks.Hi all. The rest of hw9 is now posted.
 
Important hint:  to help make this hw (more) manageable, we will provide some important and significant hints in recitation tomorrow.  At that time, we may even review the code for one of the answers.  For obvious reasons, you will not be allowed to take notes then.  Instead, pay careful attention and be sure to understand the key concepts, rather than trying to memorize the code.
 
Good luck with it, and good luck on tomorrow's quiz (which will focus on Snake and Tetris, though it may also cover any of the other topics within its scope).
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  This is plenty enough to get you started tonight:
 
Note that hw9 is all-solo and is due Sunday at 10pm.
 
1.  Do midterm2 from s13, including the bonus (which is not bonus for this hw):
    http://www.kosbie.net/cmu/spring-13/15-112/handouts/midterm2.html
For the code tracing, include evidence that you traced the code and do not just include the answers.
 
More later....Have fun!Hi all.  I posted this to our Google calendar, but not to Piazza (whoops).  I have OH today from 12:45pm (so already in progress) until 2:15pm (sharp, as I have a meeting then).
 
Cheers.Yes, OOP (classes) is also on quiz7.  :-)Hi all.  Some of the CA's created this Functions Redux practice sheet for you (also available via the usual links on the course website):
http://www.kosbie.net/cmu/fall-13/15-112/handouts/notes-functions-redux-practice.html
 
Also, just a reminder that quiz7 is tomorrow (or perhaps Friday in recitation, or perhaps some of each), and it covers Functions Redux, OOP (classes), Animation, Snake, Tetris, and hw8.
 
Plus, I posted the recursion practice problems that we started yesterday's lecture with, along with a few more in case it helps.  Here you go:
http://www.kosbie.net/cmu/fall-13/15-112/handouts/recursion-motivation.py
 
Carpe diem.Hi again.  After spending so much time with some of you in OH over the past week, I was keenly aware of your serious effort on hw8.  Now, perusing some of the hw8 submissions, I'm equally impressed by the results, which are really solid.  And so:  I hereby anoint you intermediate programmers.  Nice job!!!
 
And then there's this:  We are almost done, just 5 more days.  Hw9 is the last real hw.  We'll have a mini-hw10, true, but that will be very easy (truly) and will mainly serve to inflate your hw grades.  ;-)   So we're in the homestretch, almost done with the intermediate programming part of the course.  You can do it!!!!
 
And then...  Onto term projects!!!  Huzzah!  :-)
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  This is a quick and worthy read:
  http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20121022-the-psychology-of-tetris
 
Maybe you can use the underlying psychology of Tetris to invent your own addictive game?  (And is that a good thing?  :-) ).
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  If you submit hw8 tomorrow (one day late), you only get the -10 penalty on hw8.  Your deferred hw7 submission will not be penalized.
 
Just sayin'.Hi all.  Please remember that even when collaborating is allowed, copying is not acceptable.  In particular you may not electronically send or receive your work, or any portion of your work, to or from anyone.
 
When you electronically transfer solutions, you are no longer collaborating, but simply copying instead, which is never allowed.
 
And our automated plagiarism detector is extremely effective at telling the difference between reasonable collaboration and copy-paste-edit.  So please be sure to collaborate the right way, partly because the odds of getting caught are just too high, but mainly because it is simply The Right Thing To Do.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Quiz6 grades are released.  The median was 100, which is unsurprising for a take-home quiz.  Nice job.  And I must say that some of the style was, well, impressively awful.  The three winners (if that's the right word) were informed and received their bonus.  And thanks to the rest of you who submitted tragically awful style.  :-)
 
Also, as usual, if you think there may be any grading discrepancies, your first stop is Andre (who has regular Sunday OH, but is also generally available), and then if you still have grading concerns please see me.
 
Thanks.Hi again.  Some of you are hardcoding peg solitaire dimensions.  We encourage you not to hardcode anything, including that.  Each of the 5 patterns is generalizable, so you should do that.
 
As it turns out, some Piazza questions about this were answered the other way, saying it was ok to hardcode (whoops).  Sorry for the confusion.  Because of this:  we will allow hardcoding of dimensions on this question, but really, you should not do it.
 
In addition, to be fair to those who did generalize this properly, we will provide +1 pt bonus for anyone who does not hardcode the board sizes.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Some of you are reporting sys.exit() is causing a crash rather than a graceful exit.  It seems to have something to do with IDLE, since running Python from a command shell seems to avoid the problem.
 
In any case: don't worry about it.  Just call sys.exit() and you're fine, crash or not.Hi all.  The problem actually mistates the checkers game over condition.  It's not when neither player has a move, but as soon as ONE player does not have a move.  Then that player loses.  But given the confusion, we will allow ANY even marginally reasonable game over condition.Hi all.  Let's defer quiz3-retake and quiz4-retake until after our second midterm.  You'll still get to do them if you wish, but this will allow you more time to focus on hw8, quiz7, hw9, and midterm2 first.
 
The course website includes the updated schedule.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Several of you have asked for an extension on hw8 due to the 18-100 exam.  There is not much we can practically do, nor really that we should do (read below), but:  Having said that, we will make these adjustments:
 
 
* The hw8 deadline is moved back 4 hours from Tue 8pm to Tue 11:59pm.
 
And:
 
* The hw8 one-day-late penalty is reduced from -25pts to -10pts.
 
Even with these changes, it may be that some of you (especially some of you in ECE) may have to compromise on this hw and not submit your very finest work.  That is a personal tradeoff you may have to make.  In any case, we'll do our best to support you and help you do the best you can on this hw, given whatever resources you can muster.  For example, we will adjust our OH to match the adjusted deadline, so there will be heavy CA support in the cluster right up until 11:59pm Tuesday night (and at least one CA there until 11:59pm on Wednesday night).
 
If you want more background thinking:   We simply cannot push back hw8, since that would encroach on recursion week (yikes), which would then push back the midterm, which would then push back term projects, which is definitely not going to happen.  Besides, we are helping you get ready for what lies ahead, and next term many  of you will take even more and even harder CS and ECE courses.  You simply have to get good at doing lots of hard things at the same time, and to make the tough tradeoffs that implies at times.
 
As for the release date of this hw, we had to wait until after Thursday since the hw was drafted only at that point to be largely based on Thursday's material.  But you still have a full hw cycle, so that has no bearing on the total time for the task, nor really should have any bearing on your ability to do hw8 and prepare properly for the 18-100 midterm.
 
In any case, I hope these changes help in some way.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Quiz2-retake is graded and those grades are folded into the quiz2 grades on Autolab (thanks, CA's!).  Some data:
 
74 students took quiz2-retake.
Median: 71
Average: 70.3
Max: 100
Min: 32.5
 
Net improvement to quiz2 grade:
Median: 7.25
Average: 8.27
Max: 47.5
Min: -18.25
 
86% of those who took quiz2 retake improved their quiz2 grade.  Nice job.
 
Carpe diem.Q: When using Hares and Hounds, can we ignore BoardGame's methods (cellPressed, etc) and just use the ones from hw7?
 
A: No!  That's the whole point of using BoardGame.  You must use its methods.  This will help you consider the tradeoffs between the two designs, which is the whole point of this exercise.We managed to squish those persistent bugs (whew!).  Code is here:

othelloMinimax.py
 
It is strictly for pedagogical purposes. If you really want to look at how minimax works, I recommend starting from the wikipedia page and going from there.
Enjoy.You can override methods from them, but you cannot modify those classes.Hi all.  Please do not include any code from either Animation.py or BoardGame.py in your submission. Just import them.  We'll have them available in the same folder as your code when we grade your hw.

Thanks.Hi all.  We'll do the optional lecture in WEH 5421.  I'm here now, about to start.  See (some of) you soon.Hi all.  Hw8 is posted, with that one additional problem added, as previously noted (though it's focusing on function redux, and we'll add another OOP question or two to an optional quiz prep for next week rather than to this hw).
 
This hw does several things to help prepare you for your term projects.  You'll be working with a class that you did not write from scratch, as is typical for most (nearly all) term projects.  You'll be working with code stored in multiple files, another good thing for term projects.  You'll be looking up new Pythonisms online, which is also essential for term projects. And you'll be designing UI elements of a game that are loosely specified, once again, essential for term projects.
 
So while this hw covers function redux and OOP, it also has a strong eye to preparing you for what lies just ahead....
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  So...  My request for a room was not approved (nor denied, just basically ignored), so:  we don't have a room for tomorrow's lecture.  Dang.  I am forging ahead, though.  I'll show up at 1:30pm, find a room (hopefully), post the location to Piazza, at that time and plan to start the lecture by 1:45pm sharp.  The topic is using minimax search to make a computer "AI" for 2-player perfect-information games like othello, checkers, chess, etc.
 
Attendance, of course, is optional.

Carpe diem.Hi again.  Some of you have noted that cellPressed for checkers does not use top-down design, and how yucky that is.  I AGREE!!!
 
It's great that you are having that reaction.  That method should indeed have several helper methods.  Feel free to make the change in hw8, though it's not necessary.

But it's great that you are developing your code sensibilities to the point that poorly factored code just feels wrong.  It is.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Note that you may not use BoardGame for hw7 deferrals.  So if you deferred Hare and Hounds, you will have to write it twice.  Well, of course, you write it once and then convert it.  After all, the whole point of that hw8 exercise is for you to do that very conversion ,and to think thoughtfully about what it entails. Just to be clear, all of hw8 is solo.Hi all.  Here is most of hw8, just one small problem to add which I'll probably get to in the morning, which is also when it will be posted to the course website.  Enjoy!
 
David
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
0) Include your deferred game from hw7, if applicable.  This is not part of hw8, it is only part of hw7, and you all should have completed it some time ago, but you should submit it along with your hw8.py submission.
 
1) Previous Quiz (place in triple-quotes at top of file) 
Do S13 quiz8: 
http://www.kosbie.net/cmu/spring-13/15-112/handouts/quiz8.html 

2) Better Checkers 
Start with the checkers game we covered in recitation, and write BetterCheckersBoardGame as a subclass of BoardGame, which adds the following: (1) only forward motion (right now, pieces can illegally move backwards); (2) a game over condition (when only one player has pieces, or when neither player has a legal move); and (3) kings, which are obtained by moving a pawn (a non-king piece) all the way across the board to the opponents' side, and which can legally move in reverse; and (4) mandatory jumps, so if a jump exists, it must be taken. Note that we still are only doing single jumps, not multiple jumps (which in our simple implementation are still not legal moves). The game should be runnable with the following code: 
BetterCheckersBoardGame().run() 

3) Hares and Hounds Redux 
Make HaresAndHoundsBoardGame which converts your Hares and Hounds solution from hw7 into a subclass of BoardGame. The game should be runnable with the following code: 
HaresAndHoundsBoardGame(3,5).run() # 3 rows x 5 cols 

4) Peg Solitaire. 
Read about Peg Solitaire here (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peg_solitaire). Then, write PegSolitaireBoardGame as a subclass of BoardGame. Your game will support the first 5 board variants listed here (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peg_solitaire#Board_variants). We will not use board variant 6, though, as it is not placed on a rectilinear grid of cells. In any case, at the start, the user begins in board variant #1. If the user presses 'r', that resets the game, starting over with the same board. If the user presses right arrow, that resets the game with the next board (with wraparoud, so board variant #1 follows board variant #5). If the user presses left arrow, the game resets to the previous board (also with wraparound). Also, if the user presses 'u', it undoes the previous move. Repeated pressing of 'u' will continue to undo moves, all the way to the start of that board (so pressing 'u' will not change board variants, for example). Pressing 'q' should quit the game. Look up how to use sys.exit for this purpose. The game should be runnable with the following code: 
PegSolitaire().run() 

5) One more OOP thing (TBD) 
We need to cover basic OOP here, not just applying BoardGame. This will not be an overly large problem. Posted soon, in any case. 

BONUS 

#1-3) All the same bonus as on hw7, worth +5 pts each (max +10 pts total) 

4) [2 pts] Add multiple jumps to Checkers, so multiple jumps are not only supported but in fact are required when possible. Note that a player does not have to make the longest-possible jump, they just cannot end a turn on a cell from which a jump can be made. You may do this bonus in addition to the +10 pts from hw7 bonus.Hi all.  As the subject line says, please include the run function in your quiz6 submission.

Also, please add a top-level call to your run function to make it so when we load your quiz6.py submission, it runs your code.  This is not how we ask that your hw submissions work, usually, since that normally complicates our grading.  But in this case, it would help.  Thanks!  :-)Hi all.  Some of you are trying the darndest things to get the screen to flash multiple times.  Things *not* to do include using time.sleep, or calling redrawAll multiple times from a controller, or figuring out how to redraw immediately, or, or, or...
 
You should solve this problem using the everyday MVC techniques we have learned so far, with no unusual twists.
 
I would suggest using a c.d.variable to track whether or not you are in a flashing mode, and maybe a second c.d.variable to somehow track the time so you know when to stop flashing.  Something like that.
 
There's your hint of the day.  Enjoy.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.Q: Is quiz6 on Autolab?
A: Yes.  For numerous seconds already!
 
Q: Does the click have to be inside the circle, or is it ok to just do inside the square around the circle?
A: Inside the circle.  You'll need to use the distance formula (hint).
 
Q: Is it true that the submission that works but has the worst possible style gets bonus points?
A: Yes!  :-)   However, if you go for these bonus points, be really sure it works, since of course it will be hard to assign partial credit in such cases.  But yes, those bonus points are out there for the least-stylistic among you (code-wise).
 
Q: Do people really ask all the questions you post in your Q+A's?
A: Yes, mostly.  Not this one, though.Hi again.  Last post for a while.  Hw8 needs to be reworked to leverage what we covered in lecture today.
 
So:  since it will come out 2 days later than usual (read: tomorrow rather than yesterday), it will be due 2 days later than usual (read: Tuesday rather than Sunday).
 
So:  hw8 is due Tuesday night at 8pm.
 
We will draw down some of our weekend OH coverage so we have the additional personnel to provide more coverage on Monday and Tuesday nights.  Even so, we'll still offer extensive weekend coverage.  Andre will post the revised schedule soon.
 
Those seeking an early jump on hw8 tonight who have completed their deferred work from hw7 might perhaps do some of the interesting bonus problems (that are re-assigned from hw7).  :-)
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  The code from class today is posted now.  It being a case study, you should study it thoroughly!

Enjoy.
Hi all.  During the 10:30 lecture, I amended quiz6 (which is posted now on the course website) to be collaborative and take-home, due tomorrow night at 11:59pm.  This is true for everyone, including the 9am lecture.  Having said that, if you took the 9am quiz and you want that one to be your submission, we will accept it and grade it.  Or, you could work with up to 2 other students and submit via Autolab by 11:59pm tomorrow night.  Your choice.
 
For those who are seeking quiz partners, I recommend attending CA's office hours tonight on the hours (8pm, 9pm, 10pm).  They will try to help you organize into groups if you are so inclined.  Totally optional, of course.
 
Also, as a (rather peculiar) Halloween bonus, the minimum grade for anyone who clearly puts for some reasonable effort will be 90 (though to earn more than that you have to do it the old-fashioned way).  So there's very, very little downside to this quiz.
 
We may have the same topics appear on next week's quiz, so it's a good idea to know them well by then.  So this is something more of a practice quiz than a real one, except you get to keep the real points!
 
Carpe diem.  And carve pumpkinem.Hi all.  So you know:  on quizzes and exams, you can write c.d.foo instead of canvas.data.foo.
 
This includes today's quiz, of course, on which you will in fact use canvas.data.
 
Also, as always, we do not grade for style on quizzes or exams, but the better your style, the more likely we will be able to divine what you are doing, hence the better your grade (generally).
 
Good luck!Hi all.  For those taking the 15-151 midterm tomorrow, if you are interested in also taking the quiz2-retake this week, I would strongly recommend taking it tonight at 9:30pm.  However, if you do take it tomorrow, then since the 15-151 midterm ends at 9:30pm, we will start quiz2-retake tomorrow night 10 minutes later, at 9:40pm, and run past 10pm by just a little bit.
 
Good luck on the exam tomorrow, and on the quiz retake!Hi all.  Since some (most, in fact) of you deferred Hares and Hounds, others deferred Tetris, and still others (amazingly) deferred Snake, we can't really cover any of those in this week's quiz.  No worries.  Thursday's quiz will cover functions redux and animations.
Good luck!Hi all.   Since almost nobody did the hw7 bonus, it is now hw8 bonus (announced here in case you wish to get a jump on it before hw8 is published).  As a bonus bonus, if you did submit hw7 bonus, you may *resubmit* it for hw8 bonus, too!  :-)
 
In any case, the now-hw8 bonus questions are interesting, and I hope some of you do them (especially the Hares And Hounds computer player bonus).
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Sorry for the confusion.  There is no quiz today (Tuesday).  Quiz2-retake will be both Wed and Thu night, 9:30-10pm, in 7500 WEH.  Also, quiz6 will be Thursday in class.  It will cover functions redux, basic animations, snake, and tetris.Hi all.  So in some former semesters, in addition to the various ways we've shown you to deal with the global canvas problem, we did another one where we could recover the canvas in an event handler by accessing event.widget.canvas.  That explains this line in some of the online course notes:
  canvas = event.widget.canvas
 
The thing is, we aren't doing it that way this semester.  So you should not have that line.  Just delete it and use lamdas and closures to pass canvas references around.Hi all.  89 students took quiz1-retake.  The median was a strong 78 (nice job).  Nearly 90% of quiz1-retake takers improved over quiz1, with a median improvement of 23 points, so with averaging this equates to a median grade improvement of 11.5 points.  Kudos!
 
If you took quiz1-retake, your quiz1 score in Autolab now reflects the average of your original score and quiz1-retake.  Those quizzes will be returned in the next recitation.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Students are reporting a major problem with using Python with the just-released Mac OS update.  Dang.
 
We don't know the exact problem nor do we have a recommended fix as yet.
 
So:  if you are experiencing this problem, please bring your laptop to the CA's so they can investigate with you.  We'll post a workaround as soon as we have one.
 
Meanwhile, you can use a cluster machine to do your homework.  Plus, it seems that older versions of Python may work, but before you make wholesale changes, maybe wait for us to figure this out and get back to you.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  I just wrapped up an ARB where a student from this semester faced a severe penalty for violating the cheating and collaboration policy.  No fun at all for anyone.
 
But it is a good time to reflect on what we can do to avoid such outcomes.
 
Foremost, we can remind you how important it is to follow the rules, and foremost among them is to do your own work!  On solo work (which is nearly all the hw), you must not consult others except for course staff.  Also, "everyone is doing it" is not a defense:  first, it's not true, even if some cheating indeed does occur.  But second, even if it was true, it would not matter -- if we detect a violation, you will not get a first-time warning (there is no such thing), but rather you will face severe penalties up to failing the course and then perhaps even more penalties at the university level (such as suspension for a year).
 
Some people may think there are ethical reasons not to cheat.  It's hard to deny that.  But never mind the ethical considerations.  From a simple game theory perspective, it can't be worth it.  You have invested far too much to throw it all away in the name of a few points.  The risks are way too high and the (misperceived) benefits way too low.  So don't do that.
 
We have vast supports here for you.  Use them.  And if that's not enough, and you can't finish the homework on time with what you consider a strong enough grade, then submit it anyway, as-is, and accept the grade you earned.  And then come talk to me and we will happily try to help you be more effective in the future.
 
You all came here to get somewhere else, to become great engineers and scientists and artists and musicians and businesspeople and doctors and lawyers and philosophers and citizens of the world.  You came here to move towards your dreams and aspirations of a good and maybe even great life, of a life well-lived.  Cheating undermines all of that, even if you don't get caught!  Think about that.  And if you do get caught, well, all the more so.

Respect yourself.  Respect your peers.  Respect your university.  But, above all, respect yourself.  Don't cheat.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  A couple things about Hare and Hounds:
 
1) Your game should be 3x5, as in the picture.   But of course for good programming style, these values should be stored in well-chosen variables, and if we changed either or both of them, your game should adjust accordingly and still be playable.
 
2) Remember that only one hound moves per hounds' turn.  That's why we first click on the hound, to indicate which one.
 
3) Notice that the cells form a 2d list, especially if you add the four missing corners.  And so this can be represented internally using a 3x5 (or whatever those values are) 2d list.  We recommend this.
 
4) Many design decisions were left up to you.  So, for example, no need to ask us how large the cells should be, or what colors they should be, or what font you should use, or where you should display the score, etc.  You need to decide all of this and more!
 
Good luck!   And...  Carpe diem!
Hi all.  The always-reliable CA's got quiz5b graded last night (thanks, always-reliable CA's!!!), and...  the results are solid, with a median of 84, with 35 perfect scores.
 
Whew.  That's much better!  And so there is no quiz5c.  Which is fortunate, as you all have to concentrate on event-based programming, model-view-controller, and the Snake and Tetris case studies (which you should know inside-out-and-backwards for the next quiz)!
 
Nice job, everyone!It includes what I hope is a fun SOLO game for you to write (Hound and Hares).
 
Enjoy!  :-)

Carpe diem.Hi again.  This is just a gentle reminder that you should be working on your term project even now.  At the very least, you should be going through the term project gallery, getting ideas about what others have done, thinking about what you might like to do.  Even better, but not required, is to get an actual jump on the work.  In particular, now is the time to try out any modules you may need, such as opencv for video or scipy for scientific computation or maybe twisted for networking and so on.  Installing and using modules can be tricky, and you'll need to show that you can use a module prior to the actual term project assignment date in order to use it in your term project.
 
Of course, we are here to help.  Especially at office hours (since it's nearly impossible to answer most term project questions over Piazza or email).
 
Good luck, have fun, and...  Carpe diem!Hi all.  Please note the schedule change for midterm2, moved back 2 days to Thursday of that same week.  This will let us have more review sessions in the evenings just prior to the midterm.  We unfortunately cannot have an in-lecture review that Tuesday beforehand, as we have to use that day for the term project assignment discussion.  Even so, with the weekend and evening review sessions, there will be plenty of time for you to properly prepare.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  While playing the always-fun "Google Calendar Bin Packing Game", I think I figured out how to arrange things better, so now I can in fact offer OH today from 3:15pm to 4:45pm.
 
And so I shall!
 
See (some of) you then.Hi all.  Two things:
 
1) You may collaborate with up to 2 others on Tetris and Snake, and (here's the clarification): they may be from different sections.  Each of you still submits your own work, though, with no copying allowed (yes, you may collaborate, meaning actively working closely together on all parts of the problem, and no you may not just copy).  Be sure to list the names and andrew id's of your collaborators at the top of your hw7.py file!
 
2) Also, note this edit that was made to the hw7 post:  The Tetris tutorial uses a dictionary in canvas.data, like this: canvas.data["foo"}. You have to change this to use a Struct(), like this: canvas.data.foo. Also, it uses a global canvas, which of course you should not do.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  I'll add the OOP part tomorrow (and the hw is due Monday in any case), and perhaps a small SOLO animation exercise, and also some bonus, but...  It's Wednesday, so a good chunk of the hw should be posted, so here it is:
 
Snake Tutorial 
This problem is COLLABORATIVE. You may work in groups of up to 3 students (yourself included). In a file named snake.py, carefully follow all the steps in this step-by-step Snake Tutorial. Of course, you are ultimately given the answer in the tutorial. Even so, while you may consult that solution, you may not simply copy and submit that version, but instead you must work through each step carefully and then submit the version that you typed in (and hopefully completely understood, from first principles) yourself, even if it is basically the same as the solution (as one would expect). Make sure that you change the solution so that it does not use globals!

Tetris Tutorial 
This problem is COLLABORATIVE. You may work in groups of up to 3 students (yourself included). In a file named tetris.py, write Tetris exactly according to the design given in this step-by-step tutorial. You may not use a different design (except for eliminating globals), even if you think there's a better way to do it (there probably is, but you still have to do it this way).

Note:  The Tetris tutorial uses a dictionary in canvas.data, like this:  canvas.data["foo"}.  You have to change this to use a Struct(), like this:  canvas.data.foo.  Also, it uses a global canvas, which of course you should not do.

Enjoy!!!Hi again.  And in response to other inquiries, quiz5b is tomorrow and it is a normal everyday quiz.  It is not a retake.  It counts  like any other quiz.  So, for example, it does not replace quiz5, nor average with quiz5, et cetera.  It's just numbered 5b since it covers the same material as quiz5.   In any case, everyone is expected to take quiz5b during their respective lecture tomorrow.Hi all.  Some students have asked if they could first see the quiz to judge whether or not they wish to take it.  Sorry, but no.  If you attend a quiz session, the quiz counts.Hi all.  Answering a student question, you may not use tonight's session as a practice and take it "for real" tomorrow night.  We are offering 2 nights so that (nearly) everyone who wants to take it can find a time that works for them.   But you may only attend one session (or none, if you prefer).
 
Note that these follow other sessions that will run from 8pm to 9:30pm each night.  Anyone can attend those, of course.  :-)Hi all. Please read these important points about quiz1-retake:
 
Important: quiz1-retake will include bitwise operators, as well as 2's complement (in particular, you should know that -x is the same as (~x + 1)).

Quiz1-retake will be optionally offered tonight (Wed) and tomorrow night (Thu) from 9:30pm to 10pm in 7500 WEH.  This is optional, you may skip it with no effect on your grade.  But if you do take it, the grade counts, and your new quiz1 grade will be the average of your original quiz1 and quiz1-retake.

You may only take the retake once, whether tonight or tomorrow night.

For those who wish to take the quiz retake but who have university-approved conflicts (other courses, etc) with both nights, please email me briefly explaining both conflicts and listing all the times you are available on Friday to take the quiz retake.
Carpe diem.Hi all.  It turns out to be a good thing that my OH ran for 6+ hours yesterday, because I will unfortunately be unable to host OH today.  Also, tomorrow is not scheduled due to my having to attend an ARB meeting at that time (sigh).  I will be available today and tomorrow and in general via email and Piazza, though, and of course the CA's have their OH as usual.Hi all.  As we started the semester, most (though not all) of you were just starting your freshman year.  Now you all have at least one half-semester completed.  It is plainly obvious that you have come a long way already.  Congratulations!  Academically, you all have learned a great deal.  And kudos for that!
 
Now that you (mostly) know how to mange the workload and intensity of CMU, I hope you continue to work on simply living well, by your own standards, whatever that means to you.
 
It is definitely possible to be happy and healthy while succeeding here.  Conversely, if you neglect your health and happiness, then it quickly becomes very hard or even impossible to succeed.  Besides, being unhealthy and unhappy is very stressful and just no fun at all (no kidding).  So place your health first.  Really.  Truly.  You may think your grades may suffer if you do, but:  (1) they probably won't in the near-term; (2) they almost certainly won't in the long-term (quite the opposite, in fact); and (3) who cares?  Your health matters more than your grades.  That is worth repeating a few hundred times until it sinks in.
 
It's not that grades and learning do not matter.  Of course they do.  Especially learning.  You have some life goals that flatly require that you learn a great deal over the next 4 years (and beyond).  Of course!  It's just that your health simply matters more.
 
And it's also not like these are independent, like you can do some life calculus trading one for the other at will and without costs.  That's the fools' gold of life calculus.  You may think you can deprive of yourself of sleep and drive up your grades without any serious unwanted consequences.  But you would be wrong on all counts.  That is not how it works.  Surely by now you have seen this in others, as they steadily drive themselves into an unhappy, ineffective, and unsustainable state.  Sadly, they do so in the name of grades, which then ironically suffer anyhow.  Maybe you can see some of this in yourself, too. If so, you can fix it, and find a healthier, more sustainable way forward.
 
If you made a list of everything that mattered most to you in life, I bet grades and learning would be on that list for most of you.  But I bet many other things would be, too, such as family, friends, health, happiness, hobbies, helping others, and enjoying the joy and beauty of our world.  You have to make your own list.  Some of you may love to listen to music, or to make your own music.  Others, not so much.  So it goes.  Make your own list.  But then step back and look at that list:  see how learning and grades are just one among many?  Don't sacrifice the rest in the name of that one!!   Instead, find a way to balance it all as best you can.  Of course, you are far too busy to do everything you wish you could do.  That will never change in this crazy busy world we live in.  But you can be thoughtful and proactive in choosing where you place your time and energy to achieve the best balance among all your priorities.
 
Which brings me to the subject line:  be true to your priorities.  Really take time to think through what all your priorities are, and then live your life according to your own rules, the ones that really matter to you.  Keep academics in perspective.  But always respect yourself, your entire self.  And try to be your entire self:  live your life by your priorities, all of them, every day, as best you can.
 
Curiously, while this may result in less time on academics for some of you, over the long haul, I am certain you will learn more and do more with that learning, if you hew to your priorities and chase your own passions and dreams.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Midsemester grades are now posted and should show up in SIO soon.  They are up to and including hw5, quiz5, and midterm1, and do not include hw6 or AMG.  Some factoids:
 
3% scored 100 or higher!  A+!
37% received an A.
71% received an A or a B.
85% received an A or a B or a C.
Median grade is a solid mid-upper-B right now.  NIce!
 
That's a strong first half for most of you.  Let's keep trending in the right direction!

Carpe diem.Hi all.  Note that the effort clause in the AMG is for real.  There is no way you can qualify for AMG without trying hard from here on out.  Most of the AMG candidates are definitely trying hard.  Some are not.  For example, at least 8 students did not prepare much if at all for quiz5 (for example, scoring 3/75 on the word search problem despite my repeated emails telling you that it would be on the quiz).  And so none of those 8 students qualify for AMG now (which, unfortunately, means that at least some of those 8 are almost sure to fail the course now).
 
I urge you not to join that group.  Stay in the game.  You don't have to be a superhero, but you do have to give it the ol' college effort on every hw, every quiz, every exam, and of course your term project.  Try your hardest.  It gives you your best chance at success, and also keeps the AMG insurance policy available for you just in case.

Carpe diem.Hi all.  This week marks the start of the quiz retakes, starting with quiz1-retake.  Next week will be quiz2-retake, and so on.  Anyone can sit for any quiz retake.  It is entirely optional.  But if you do sit for a quiz retake, then it counts regardless of whether it helps your average.  If you do take quiz1-retake, your quiz1 score will be the average of your original quiz1 score and the quiz1-retake score.
 
As for the timing:  we will discuss and vote on this Tuesday in lecture (Andre+Charlie, please remind me!).  But you should count on one or two times being available on one or two of Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday nights, sometime in the 8pm-10pm range.  Then, for those who absolutely cannot make the posted time, they may take the quiz-retake just before/after their recitation on Friday.  Again, we will discuss this in class on Tuesday and I will post the schedule immediately after that.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  I hope some of you are having fun with the optional hw/contest.  I know some of the CA's are!   :-)
 
Here are a few updates:
 
1) The optional hw is now posted on the course website as optional-hw42.
 
2) Autolab is accepting submissions from now until Monday at 10pm.  No autograder, though.  Please triple-check that your code works before submitting.
 
3)  We added a second test that we will use as our two main tests.  Here they are:
    makeWordSearch(getWordList(odysseyText), 5*range(2,10)) 
and 
    makeWordSearch(getWordList(odysseyText), 20*range(2,10))
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Appended is the code from yesterday's talk (sorry for the delay...), with two changes:  first, Asa found the bug (it was one last confusion between self.state and state -- ugh!), so that is fixed (thanks, Asa!).  Second, I added just a little more test code at the bottom of the file.  Combined, these produced these fantastic results, which demonstrate the huge advantage of using a seenSet to avoid redoing work, but then also the advantage of using A* over breadth-first search.  Here you go:
 
algorithm          use seenSet?       totalStates 
breadthFirst          False             204663  <-- UGH!!!
breadthFirst          True                7784 
aStar                 False                188 
aStar                 True                  99  <-- WOW!!!!!

So we reduced 204k states to just 99.  Slam dunk!!!!!  A* rocks!!!!
 
Here is the code:   oneplayeraioptionallecture.py
 
Carpe diem. GHC 4th floor, by the Forbes Ave entrance.  We don't have it reserved, so we may have to move again.  Let's hope not.Hi all.  We just had a complete AV fail in 7500 WEH, so we are now vagabonds in search of a room.  We are going to try the room across the entryway from Rashid Auditorium, on the 4th floor of GHC.  We'll be there in about 5 minutes.  I'll post more if that doesn't work, either.Hi again.  Reminder that we'll have an optional/advanced lecture tomorrow from 1:30pm-3:30pm in 7500 WEH.  We'll dip our toe gently into AI, using A* to solve one-player games like the 15-puzzle (the sliding tile puzzles), and the peg-jumping game.  Fun times!

Also:  anyone who shows up on time (by 1:30pm) and can demonstrate a nominally working version of the optional hw (Word Search Odyssey (Generator with Numeric Wildcards)) will receive some early-bird bonus points on the spot!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  As many of you requested, here is the fun optional hw for this weekend.  First, the rules:

Not doing this optional hw will have no effect on your semester grade. If you do this optional hw, you have the option of including this grade in your semester grade computation or not.

Please only do this for fun and for learning, as there are easier ways to improve your grade, if that is your sole objective.

The top 3 submissions will get some sort of bonus and/or prizes. The more (reasonably serious) submissions, the bigger the prizes! So it is something of a contest, too. Though you can ignore the contest aspect and just do it for fun, of course.
 
You may work in teams of 2 (but no larger).  If you do work in a team, of course you must work closely together on all aspects of your solution.

If you work in a team, list both team members at the top of your one file, and submit that SAME file twice, once for each team member's Autolab account.

This is due submitted to Autolab by Monday at 10pm.  No extensions, no late days.

You may not ask questions about this, neither on Piazza nor by email nor anywhere else.  You have to figure this out on your own without those supports.  You can do it!

Exception:  if you think there is an error in this writeup, then you may email me (still, no Piazza posts).  I'll do my best to respond promptly.  But this would only be for an actual error, and not for, say, an explanation or a hint.
We will grade quite liberally (though still with some reasonable standard).  But to get points, your solution must run and produce a valid output and must show at least some serious thought was invested.

Now the problem:  Word Search Generator with Numeric Wildcards

On quiz5 (which is posted on the course website), we saw how wordsearches can contain numeric wildcards, where a number matches exactly that many letters in a word.  So ["c", 2, "s"] matches "cow" and "cows", but not "co".  Also, unlike on quiz5, here we will further require that every match include at least one letter on the board and not just use numeric wildcards.  So ["c", 2, "s"] will not match "ox".  Plus, no two numbers may be placed next to each other on the board (where "next to" includes diagonally (all valid king moves)).  With this in mind, write the function makeWordSearch(wordList, numberList), that takes a list of words and a list of numbers, and produces a "reasonably small" wordsearch that contains every word in the wordlist and also every number in the number list.  If a word occurs more than once in the wordlist, it still need only occur once in the wordsearch.  However, if a number occurs more than once in the numberList, then that many copies of the number must appear in the wordsearch.  Also, the only numbers that may appear in the wordsearch are those in the original numberList.  Plus, to be "reasonably small", your solution must make some reasonable use of some of the numeric wildcards.  You may not simply ignore all of them.  Also, your solution must run in under 30 seconds on our grading computer.  And your solution must be randomly generated.  We will test this by running it repeatedly on a fixed wordlist and numberList and verifying that we get different boards each time.
 
To obtain any credit, you must produce a thoughtful solution, which at a minimum means doing something better than just stacking the words in some simple manner, and you must also make some reasonably good use of the numeric wildcards.  We will be liberal in grading, but this means you will have to put some hours of hard work and serious thought into this.
 
Once you complete the function makeWordSearch(wordList, numberList), you should write a second function, getWordList(text) that takes a possibly large text string and returns an alphabetized uppercase list of all the words in that text, with each word included only once in the result (even if it occurs multiple times in the text).  Since the definition of "word" can be complicated, we will use this simple definition:  a "word" is any string of consecutive uppercase or lowercase letters.  Anything but a letter is not a word and would thus separate words.  This will result in some strange cases, such as the string "dog's carry-on" containing FOUR words -- "DOG", "S", "CARRY", "ON" (which then would be returned in a sorted list).  Strange or not, that is how we will define words.
 
For the contest, we may use several tests, but the main two we will use are as follows (where odysseyText is provided at the end of this post):
    makeWordSearch(getWordList(odysseyText), 5*range(2,10))
and
    makeWordSearch(getWordList(odysseyText), 20*range(2,10)) 
Assuming your result actually contains all the required words (with numeric wildcards) and numbers, then your score will simply be the product of (rows * cols), that is, the total size of your wordsearch.  Smaller is better.
 
This allows you to compare results with each other over the weekend, using the same text.

Good luck, have fun, and carpe diem!!!
 
David Hi all.  My apologies for class running so late today.  A minute or two now and then isn't ideal but is ok.  Running so late is not ok, and was poor planning on my part.  My apologies.
 
As a token of my appreciation, please accept +5 points bonus for everyone on the quiz you took today.
 
Even so, we will not make a habit of running so late in the future.
 
Sorry again.
 
Carpe diem.Hi again.  While most of you did very well on hw6, a small group continues to struggle.  That smaller group itself can be split into two groups, based on effort.  Some students are scoring low marks simply due to lack of sufficient effort.  For that group, we have no answer, except that your low grades will continue to reflect your effort.  However, lack of effort is not the main culprit in most cases, as students generally invested a great deal of effort, only could not get past a few bugs and so scored very low on the autograder, or even could not decipher a syntax error, and so scored 0/60 despite a huge time investment. 
 
For these cases, starting with hw6, we will commence AMG grading on autograded hw.  So you know, we always do this on quizzes and tests.  It's an alternative grading scheme where we award positive points of partial credit where we can justify it, with a cap of 50% of the available points, and then students are awarded whichever is the greater of standard grading and AMG grading (this is how we always do AMG grading).  So those of you who put forth significant effort on hw6 but still scored below 30/60 on the autograded portion are eligible for up to 30/60 on AMG grading. Of course, we don't just give those points away. We scrutinize your code for evidence that you earned whatever points you are awarded. This is just an *alternative* way to gauge how you earned your points. Hence, AMG (alternative minimum grading).
 
You do not request AMG grading.  We do it automatically for anyone in this situation.
 
If you have a very low grade, you'd still do better than AMG by fixing your submission by tonight's late deadline (since you could score up to 35/60, even taking the 25-point late deduction into account).  So doing the work and doing it well remains your best bet (unsurprisingly).
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  I hope you are all fast asleep as I type this...  I would like to commend you all on your excellent work on hw6.  It was a large and challenging hw, and your results, once again, were superb.  78% of you scored a perfect 60/60 on the autograded portion.  That's awesome.  And 90% scored an A or B, which is also a fine result.  Plus, the plagiarism detector bot is reporting that submissions are very clean (whew!).  As a group, you clearly are working hard, you are doing your own work, and it is excellent work.  What a trifecta!  :-)
 
Keep up the great work.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  So Autolab had the due time as 10pm, and it'd be wrong to change that now, so 10pm it is.
 
Good luck.Hi all.  For your planning purposes, 15-112 will mostly shutdown for mid-semester break (Fri/Sat/Sun).  This means no recitations on Friday, no office hours (mine or the CA's) on Fri/Sat/Sun, and no Piazza support on Fri/Sat/Sun.  It is a break, and everyone should enjoy some time off.  True, we just had a break two weeks ago, but so it goes.  We'll just have to endure another one.  :-)
 
Having said that, the optional course activities continue.  Specifically, as per the poll we took the other day:
 
We will have an optional/advanced lecture Saturday from 1:30pm to 3:30pm in 7500 WEH.  The topic is tentatively: 1-Player AI (solving perfect-information 1-player games/puzzles, such as 15-puzzles, peg-jumping games, etc).

We will have optional 1-on-1 term project discussions.  Please see previous post to sign up if interested.

I will post an optional hw by Friday, due Monday.  It will be optional.  You can entirely ignore it and it will not influence your grade.  Or you can do it, and if you get a grade you like, you can keep the grade, and if not, we will drop the grade at your request and it will not affect your semester grade.  Please do not do the hw to drive up your grade.  Only do it if you are really interested in doing some extra work over break, and if you'll have fun with it.  Also, remember, Piazza and OH will be unavailable, so you'll be on your own with the optional hw, if you elect to do it!

I will also post at least some of the problems for the next non-optional hw.  That hw is due a week from Sunday, though, so you can ignore it until after break and you'll be fine.  And, again, please bear in mind that Piazza and OH will be unavailable over the weekend should you get started on the next hw.

For those so inclined, I would suggest that the break is a fine time to get a jump on your term projects.  Even if you won't spend hours and hours testing all your great ideas, maybe spend some time (perhaps on a beach somewhere) blue skying, dreaming up those great ideas.  It's an important first step, and requires clarity and creativity, which sometimes is hard to summon during the day-to-day grind.   So take the time off to be really creative and find some project ideas that you can really throw yourself into.
Of course, you could always just not do any of the above, and take a full-fledged and well-deserved break.  That is entirely fine, too.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.The quiz may have something about sets and maps, too, but you can be 99.42% certain it will test your understanding of the case studies, and at a level that only comes from thoroughly studying them and writing them yourself (repeatedly, until you are quite facile at it).  Again, do not memorize code.  That is an awful idea.  Rather, be sure to thoroughly understand it, especially the top-down design.  What does each function do?  What functions does each function call?  That sort of thing.
 
Good luck with it.
 
And... Carpe diem!Hi all.  I'll update the notes soon (since I actually prefer what we wrote yesterday to some of what is in the notes), but for now, here is the code from yesterday's lecture:  oop-motivation.py and oop-place-example.py.  Enjoy!

Carpe diem.Hi all. If you are interested, please fill out the following form today, listing ALL the times you would be available for an optional 1-on-1 meeting (lasting probably about 10 minutes) to discuss your term project with one of Andre, Charlie, Jordan, or me. Time slots are available on Friday 10am to 2pm and Sunday 6pm to 10pm.
 
Here is the form:
    http://tinyurl.com/mid-semester-tp-signups

These meetings are by reservation only, so please do sign up if you are interested.
 
Thanks.Hi all.  We've received numerous questions about the early-bird bonus.
 
Here was the original post:  "for those who complete hw6 by the original Monday 8pm deadline, you will receive +5 bonus points. To receive these points, just submit by Monday night and do not submit after then."
 
So now the Q&A:

Q: Can we submit after 8pm tonight and get the early-submission bonus?
A: No.
 
Q: How about just barely after 8pm tonight?
A: No.
Q: Can we just submit the playIsola bonus problem after 8pm tonight and get the early-submission bonus?
A: No.
 
Q: Can we <<< fill in the blank with something hw6-related>>> after 8pm tonight and still get the early-submission bonus?
A: No.
 
Q: Will you say yes to anything in this post?
A: Yes!!!
 
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  So you know:  It seems the version of Python the autograder is using will not allow you to create sets using braces, like { 1, 2, 5 }. Instead, you have to use the set() function, like we did in class and in the notes, so you could do set([1,2,3]).  Good to know!Hi all.  Here's a super-helpful hint for quiz5:  you should know the case studies really, really well.  I would presume you could write any function in Word Search, Connect4, or Othello (or any reasonable variant of them) in just a few minutes, and the entirety of any of them (or any reasonable variant of them) in 20 minutes.  This will only come with practice.  Memorizing the code is hopeless.  Don't do it.  Practice it.  Understand it.
 
How to practice?  Easy.  Just start from a blank editor and write each one.  Keep doing this until you can write each one in 20 minutes or less.  Then you are set.  Until then, keep practicing.
 
Good luck!Hi all.  Some announcements for this autumnal Sunday evening:
 
Format hw6 just like previous hw's!
Just like all semester, you should ignore any instructions from previous semesters when doing those problems.  Specifically, this hw is entirely solo.  You should place all non-code manually-graded work in triple-quotes at the top of your file.  You must SHOW YOUR WORK, even on tracing problems.  Etc, etc, etc.  There is nothing special here.  It's just like previous weeks.

Use of asserts
Assert statements are only for testing purposes.  Do not use them any other time.

Use of try/except
Try and except statements are a last resort, and should be used very sparingly, really when no other decent option exists, and then strictly if the except clause really, truly is exceptional.  If you would expect to regularly land in your except clause, you have the wrong solution!
For example
Do not use try/except to catch the case when the magic square is not in fact square.
Conversely, it would be ok to use try/except when calling int(s) to convert s to an int if it is generally expected that s would be an int.

And now, number one, the Larch
http://www.python.org/doc/humor/
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  So we are all on the same page here:  To help you in your trek to becoming confident, independent programmers with rock-solid design and (especially) testing skills, we have been releasing the autograder later and later in the hw cycle each week.  This trend will continue for the semester.  We may not even release a private autograder at all at some point (of course, we will still use it for grading, only just after the deadline).
 
Do not depend on the autograder.  It is not a debugger.  It is strictly a grader.
 
You need to thoroughly test your code now, well before the autograder is released.
 
Good luck with the hw!
 
And... Carpe diem!Hi all.  Here are some answers to some popular questions I've received about the new Plan-C-related policies:
 
Q: Can we redo previous hw's?
A: No. But of course you still should basically do that for good practice, to be sure you really know that earlier material.
 
Q: So how does this plan help for students who did very poorly on earlier hw's?
A: It's really ideal for them!  Only your best 5 hw's count.  We'll probably have 10 hw's this semester.  So this means so long as you do reasonably well on the 5 remaining hw's, those early hw miscues can basically be ignored for AMG!
 
Q: And what about the first midterm?
A: If you did not do well on the first midterm, then it also does not apply to the AMG.  Yes, the second midterm does apply, but at some point some exam must...
 
Q: And quizzes?
A: As with hw's, only the top-5 count, though this means that at least one or two of the pre-midterm1 quizzes will indeed count for most students needing the AMG option.  But you get to retake them (everyone does, not just students concerned about the AMG) and get the average of the original and the retake.  This is not a panacea, and some of you may still have some lower quiz grades in the AMG.  But:  if you have 3 or 4 extremely low scores, those will all not really factor into the AMG.  And in any case, quizzes are worth 10% overall, so you have plenty of room to get that 70 regardless of your quiz score.
 
Q: So, basically, no matter how you did up until today, literally everyone now has a shot at a C in this course?
A: Yes.  That's the point.
 
Q: So do you expect that everyone in the course will get a C or better?
A: No.  I *hope* for that, but I do not expect it.  Even with the AMG, some students will likely receive D's or R's.  Just far fewer than without the AMG, and more in line with historic norms.  This plan will not hand out a C to anyone who cannot earn a C on at least some of the hw's and quizzes, and also earn a C on a midterm, term project, and final.  You still have to earn this.  But this gives a possible pathway to students whose earlier scores would have made a C basically impossible at this point.  Now it is possible.  So go earn it!!!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  I just spent some time in late-night office hours here, and...  First, I just want to commend you all on your hard work on hw6.  Really, you're doing a great job!  Kudos!
 
Second, it seems some of you are having trouble with the volume of hw6.  Plus: there are strong concerns about the shortened week and having hw7 due just a few days after hw6.
 
I think both of these are valid concerns.  So:
 
hw6 is now due Wednesday at 8pm

for those who complete hw6 by the original Monday 8pm deadline, you will receive +5 bonus points.  To receive these points, just submit by Monday night and do not submit after then.

We'll move the hw6 solution session from Monday 8pm to Wednesday 8pm.

this week's quiz is moved from Tuesday to Thursday (since it has to follow the hw6 deadline)

hw7 now will not be assigned until after break, so you still have a true break.
 
Carpe diem.As noted in class, you will be expected to be able to reproduce the case studies, or any reasonable variation of them, quickly and facilely under quiz conditions (by Tuesday's quiz).
 
This will only come with practice.
 
Do not memorize the code.  That is a complete losing venture.  It is not only nearly impossible, but it is also nearly useless.
 
Instead, understand the code!  Understand the design, the purpose of each function, how the functions relate to each other, and so on.
 
Then, be sure to practice writing the case studies.  If you understand them, this whole exercise might take one hour, which would be a very good investment.  If you do not understand them, the exercise will surely take more than one hour, but that's clearly VERY IMPORTANT time for you to invest BEFORE anything else (such as doing the homework).
 
If you cannot write the case studies from scratch, keep practicing them until you can, and then proceed with the homework.  You will be way, way better off for all that time you invest.
 
Good luck with it.
 
And... Carp diem!Hi all.  We now have a Google calendar of 15-112 Events, where you can find the most accurate info for office hours (CA's and mine), review sessions, etc.  You can find it here, or if you prefer tinyurl's, here:
    http://tinyurl.com/15-112-f13-calendar
Enjoy!

Also, you may notice it contains the following events for next week:
  * Monday: Hw6 Solution Session 
  * Tuesday: Week 8 review and Hw7 prep 
  * Wednesday: Another Week 8 review and Hw7 prep
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  We are seeing lots of questions that make it very clear that a good number of you are (unfortunately) doing the homework without first studying the notes.
 
For example, students are asking:  how do you add a value to a set?  What does (s|t) mean for sets?  And so on.  These are very easy questions that are all answered in the notes and again in the required reading.
 
This is a recipe for disaster.  Doing the homework before really reading and mastering the notes is a near guarantee that you will burn lots of time, learn the material less well, and drive up your stress levels.  Ugh, double ugh, and triple ugh.
 
If you are doing this, stop!  First of all, your goal should not be to finish the homework, but to learn the material, which most assuredly requires that you study the notes first.  But even if you take somewhat jaded view and say your goal is strictly to just finish the homework, learning be damned, even then the fastest way to do that is to stop doing the homework!!!
 
Go study the notes first.  And only then proceed with the homework.  Because you cannot solve problems using tools that you do not yet understand.
 
Carpe diem.i all.  We've been seeing a lot of questions about magic squares.  All of them are answered by a careful reading of the Wikipedia page which we are using as the definition of a magic square, and which says:  "a magic square is an arrangement of numbers (usually integers) in a square grid, where the numbers in each row, and in each column, and the numbers in the forward and backward main diagonals, all add up to the same number."
 
Actually, some also require a careful reading of the writeup, which says: "isMagicSquare 
Write the function isMagicSquare(a) that takes a 2d list and returns True if it is a magic square and False otherwise."
 
So:
 
Q: Do we have to handle non-square lists?
A: The writeup only says "takes a 2d list", so you cannot assume the lists are square.
 
Q: Can we at least assume the lists are rectangular?
A:  Yes.  That's a 15-112 thing, but we assume 2d lists are rectangular unless explicitly told otherwise, which is not the case here.
 
Q: Can we also assume it IS a 2d list, and not, say, a string?
A: Yes.  The write says:  "takes a 2d list".  So you're set.
 
Q: Can we assume it is a 2d list of integers?  Say, might there be strings in there?
A: The write only says:  "takes a 2d list".  It says nothing about integer.
 
Q: What about floats?
A:  We won't expect you to deal with almostEquals, if that's what you are asking....
 
Q: Does the magic square have to be a "normal" magic square ,with numbers from 1 to N**2?
A: The writeup does not mention the word "normal".
 
Q: Does the magic square have to be a "non-trivial" magic square, with N>= 3?
A: The writeup does not mention the word "non-trivial".
 
Q: [Here is a better question, actually...] Is the empty list a magic square?
A: This one is tricky, and depends on a close reading of the definition.  With the definition above (re-read it to be sure), each row and column and diagonal must add up to "the same number".  Since no row or column or diagonal of an empty matrix adds up to ANY number, I take this to mean NO, an empty list is not a magic square by the given definition.  Note, though, that we could slightly change the definition so it SEEMS the same and yet admits the empty list as a magic square.  In particular, we could say:  "where no two rows, columns, or diagonals add up to different numbers".  Were that the case, then the empty list would pass that definition.  But that is not the definition we are using, and empty lists are not magic squares here.
 
Bottom line:  do not make assumptions, and do read the problem statement very carefully.
 
That's how you do Polya Step 1.

Carpe diem.Hi all.  Sorry for the late notice, but we'll have to move this weekend's lecture to next weekend.  And don't worry for those who will be out of town over mid-semester break, we'll be sure to have a reprise once you return (probably that Monday, but maybe that Tuesday).
 
Enjoy your weekend![ Quoted from course syllabus. Please read carefully, and please direct any questions or concerns to me. Thanks. --DK ]
 
Alternate Minimum Grading (AMG) Policy 
This AMG policy is available to everybody, but is designed specifically for those students who struggle in the first part of the course and then through sustained hard work and dedication manage to elevate their performance in the latter part of the course to a level that merits passing with a C, even if their Standard Grade might be lower than that. 

In addition to Standard Grading as described above, we will separately compute your grade using an Alternate Minimum Grading (AMG). Students do not sign up for AMG. Every student will be considered both for Standard Grading and AMG, and their semester grade will be the higher of the two (where the highest grade via AMG is a C). 

To compute your Alternate Minimum Grade, first use the followingto compute your raw score:
 
AMG Course Component   Weight
Final Exam              25% 
Best Midterm Exam       15% 
Best 5 Quizzes          10% 
Best 5 Homeworks        20% 
Term Project            30% 

The quiz retake policy still applies for AMG. Also, the half-weight policy (for the lowest two scores) still applies to the best-5 quizzes and homeworks, but it does not apply to the best midterm (since that makes no sense with only one midterm counting towards the AMG). 

Unlike the Standard Grade, effort is heavily factored into your AMG score, and in fact you cannot qualify for AMG unless you put forth sustained effort (as judged by the course faculty) on every homework, quiz, and exam, particularly starting after midterm1. The effort grade is determined by the discretion of the course faculty (in consultation with the course staff), and is a multiplier of your raw score, so your AMG score is (effort * rawScore). Just as a lack of sustained effort will result in disqualification, in a select few cases, students exhibiting exceptionally strong effort may receive an effort score exceeding 100% (by some small amount). In any case, if your effort-adjusted AMG score is 70 or higher, you qualify for a C as your semester grade. Once again, the highest grade possible via AMG is a C.Hi all.  Thanks to the many of you (students and staff) who took the time to so thoughtfully discuss Plan C with me.   I value your input very much, and while I don't want to suggest that this is a democratic process (it's not), I do hope to satisfy all your stated concerns (really, I do).
 
And...  After much deliberation, we have settled on a couple of policies which I believe will achieve the stated goals while balancing everyone's concerns.  Neither policy is "Plan C", per se, so there is no such thing as "Plan C" by name.  But together, they achieve what we were aiming for.
 
The next two posts describe the policies, which are also available in the course syllabus.  Please read each post very carefully.
 
If you have any questions or concerns about either of these policies, I am very happy to address them, but please do not post them to Piazza and please do not ask your CA's.  Instead, please email or talk to me directly, though you may also ask Andre (or Charlie or Jordan).
 
I know nearly all of you are working very hard, and I am heartened to see just how much you have collectively learned so far this semester.  I anticipate great term projects and strong final exams.  These policies are to ensure that your semester grades properly reflect all that hard work and great learning.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Hw6 is now fully posted.  Rather than add those two larger exercises, I moved them instead to hw7, and replaced them with two easy 2d-list exercises (isMagicSquare and isKingsTour) and a medium exercise extending our Othello case study.
 
This means that hw6 is basically a typical hw load, so there is no pressing need for extending it to Monday.  But the extension was announced, so it is binding.  Hw6 is due Monday at 8pm (note that it is 8pm, and not 10pm).  Even so, we expect most of you to finish hw6 by Sunday 10pm, and we will staff OH accordingly.
 
As for hw7, it will include those two problems (data analysis and wordsearch generator).  They will be posted soon.  We recommend that you get a jump on those two questions in hw7 asap, since hw7 is due Thursday night.  It will also include some easier exercises based on the material we cover in class on Tuesday, but those will be, well, easier.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  For those of you thirsting to get a start on hw6, here is a pre-post.  One more problem (in addition to the tabular data analysis) may be added tomorrow (depending on how lecture goes):
 
1) s13 quiz6 #1-4 

2) f12 hw7b (all) 

3) f12 hw7a: isLegalSudoku and friendsOfFriends 

4) tabular data analysis
Coming soon!

N) bonus: isola  [up to 5 pts]
Write a console-based version of this game:
    http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isola_(board_game) 
Include the function playIsola() in your hw6.py file if you did this bonus so we can find it and grade it.  All the design decisions are left up to you (and we do understand that console-based games have their limitations).  Have fun!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  Please note that I will be unable to have OH today.  I'll extend tomorrow's to run at least from noon to 3pm and maybe a bit longer (though I may not be able to stay all the way until 4:30pm like yesterday, but we'll see).  So I'll still have about 10 hours of OH this week.  But none today...
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Strangely, there were many people arriving late to lecture today.  It was disruptive, and inconsiderate of your classmates.  It's also unfair to the CA's who have to answer all your questions about what you missed while you were not at lecture.
 
Bottom line:  don't do it.  Please do not arrive late to lecture.

Thanks.

David
Hi all.  I hope you all enjoyed a restful and restorative weekend.  And now it's Monday and we're back in business.  Woohoo!
 
As a small bit of backlogged business, attached is some code from last weekend's optional lecture on heaps, priority queues, heapsort, Huffman Coding (compression), and more.  Enjoy!
 
David
Hi all.  So you know, the current grade distribution has about 1/3rd A's and just over 1/3rd B's, and an overall median around 86.  This is great!  So everything at the top and middle of the distribution is rock solid.  Just keep up the great work.
 
However, continuing with the distribution, we have about 1/6th C's (which is fine), and (here's the issue) 1/6th D's and R's.
 
That last group (D's and R's) is much too large.  We simply must work to get those D's and R's into C's.  We cannot just lower the bar, of course, but we can (and will!) do two things:  first, we can try even more to help you use your resources as effectively as possible; and second, we can provide some (optional) alternative means of achieving a C.  Not lowering the bar, but modifying how you get over it.  I will provide more details about that within the next week or so.  For now, if you have a D or R, just know that we are very aware of your situation and actively planning how to respond most effectively.  Everyone at this point (or at least everyone who has been actively participating in the hw's and quizzes) should have some reasonable pathway to at least a C in this course.
 
One thing, though: while most students in that group have been working reasonably hard, some in that group, especially at the bottom, have had serious lapses in effort.  For that group, we cannot help you if you do not help yourself.  And in any case, you should understand this: if you have even one more missed (or largely incomplete) hw or quiz from this point forward, you will probably fail the course.  We are not going to provide a pathway to a C that does not include sustained hard work (and in any case, you will still have to clear the bar, including passing the final exam, so you'll need to work hard for that).  You still have a chance of earning a C, but only if you do all the work and do it to a sufficient level of effort, week in and week out.
 
I'll provide more details about the new plan soon (which we are referring to as "Plan C", for obvious reasons, since the goal is for everyone to earn a C or higher).  For now, I just wanted to post this since some of you may be a bit concerned about your midterm performance and your overall grade.  We are not in the business of failing you.  We are in the business of teaching you and enabling you to earn a decent grade in this course.  We are very dedicated to that goal.
 
So for now:  don't panic.  And do enjoy the weekend away from 15-112, regardless of your grade.  We'll hit the ground running early next week.
 
More soon...
 
Carpe diem.
 
DavidHi all.  The optional/advanced lecture is tomorrow (Saturday) from 1pm to 3pm in WEH 7500.
 
The reprise will be led by Edison and Zhiyu (thanks!) on Sunday from 6pm to 8pm in WEH 5415.
 
Carpe diem!

David
Hi again.  Sorry for the flood of posts, but this is worth noting (I think):  with some time off this weekend, it is a great opportunity for you to get an early jump on your term projects.  Not coding so much as just thinking about what you'd perhaps like to do.  Maybe drift through the gallery (see link just below the Autolab link) and watch some videos from last semester or (via links at bottom) previous semesters.
 
If you have no idea where to start, think about what you enjoy, what you'd love to do, what you would be proud to have built, what you might like to demo in a job interview.
 
Also, if you know your general topic area, the next step is to poke around and find some existing apps that are similar to what you have in mind (do a "market study" or "competitive analysis").  Make a list of these, you'll need that for your final term project report anyhow.  And make a list of what you like and don't like about them.  This is just to give you a more concrete notion of what you want to do.  Polya, Step 1.
 
Ok, now that you have a decent idea of what you'd like to do, it's onto how to do it.  For many, though not all of you, this might entail using Python modules we have not and will not cover in class.  Great!  So you need to search around and find some candidate modules that do what you want.  Read about them, try to find the few that seem the most promising. Then try to download them, install them, and run some of the demos that they normally include with such modules.  If you can get the demos working, try slightly modifying them and running them again.  This shows that you can at least edit and run code that uses that module.  It's a good first step.  Then you can more seriously consider if you want to use that module in your term project.
 
You are free to use anything at all, so long as you cite it.  Of course, you won't get credit just for using something complex, but that complex module might be just the ticket you need to do your own amazing project!
 
Carpe diem!

David
Hi again.  Please note that Andre will still be hosting his regular weekly OH this Sunday from 8 to 10pm (thanks, Andre!).  This for example would be your first stop if you have midterm grading concerns.  I should add, though, that it is notoriously difficult and subjective to grade some types of questions.  We work very hard to get our grading as reasonable and consistent as possible.  As such, it is unlikely that we'd make small changes to grades on subjective concerns.  That said, grading mistakes do happen, and we of course are quite happy to fix those.
 
Carpe diem.
 
DavidHi again.  Please note that I will not have office hours today (I typically do not have OH on Fridays, in case the pattern has not become apparent).
 
I will have OH next week as follows:
    Mon:  noon to 2pm
    Tue:  noon to 2pm
    Wed:  noon to 1:30pm (ends early)
    Thu:  noon to 2pm
 
All but Wednesday may run a bit late as needed.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Hi all.   Just as you all could use a well-earned break, so can our CA's, who worked very hard to help you all prepare for the midterm (which plainly you were!) and then to get everything graded and returned by today.  And so:  we'll all take a break over this weekend.
 
There will not be any CA office hours today, tomorrow, or Sunday.  We will resume our office hour schedule on Monday.
 
Piazza will also be only lightly manned.  If you have issues needing rapid response, your best bet is to email your CA directly, or for grading issues, email Andre, or for really anything, email me.
 
There probably will be an optional/advanced lecture, though (see next post).
 
Enjoy your weekend!!!  :-)

Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Thanks to the superhuman efforts of our awesome CA's, the midterms are now graded.  And the results were, on the whole, very solid.  The raw median was 77, which for this test is really strong.  Nice job!!!  The adjusted median is 80, and the scores in Autolab reflect this adjustment.  The top adjusted score was 104.  Wow!!!  Also, Autolab is current with all scores.  Our overall median semester grade is 86 right now, which is also rock solid.  Way to go!!!!
 
Also, since the midterms are now graded, they will be returned tomorrow in recitation.  CA's will also go over some of the answers.  They will not review grading issues or concerns, if you have any.  Those go to Andre, as usual.
 
I'll post something tomorrow about what may happen, if anything, for this weekend. At this point, it's way past my bedtime, and I still have a long drive home, so I'll post that in the a.m.
 
Once again, great job everyone.  And enjoy your weekend off.  You sure earned it!!!  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Please do not post grading-related questions or issues to Piazza.  We are very happy to discuss any questions or concerns you have.  And while our CA's are truly stupendous graders, they are not perfect (who is), so a tiny fraction of errors do occur, and we of course do fix those.  And even when errors do not happen (as is the case for most inquiries), we still are happy to clarify grading for you.

The process:  your first stop for any grading issue is Andre.  Please see him, or email him.  But please do not post to Piazza.
 
Also, once you have seen Andre, you are always welcome to then come to me.  I am happy to discuss any grading matter, but only once you've first seen Andre (since that will take care of 95% of the cases).
 
Thanks.
 
David
Hi all.  The CA's finished grading quiz5 last night (of course!).  And the results are a mixed bag.  The median is 70, without adjustment, which sounds good.  And on a normal quiz would be fairly solid.  But on this particular quiz, that was not an especially strong result.
 
Most of you did very poorly on q1, the 2d list tracing with aliasing.  Amazingly, almost nobody used the arrow diagrams I showed you in class (sigh..), where two arrows pointing to the same object are aliases.  I cannot see how you can answer such questions without them. And in fact most of you demonstrated this very point.  So:  you need to learn to use those arrow diagrams!  And soon, since we WILL have a quiz next week on this exact same material.  Also, on that quiz, we will not give credit for any answers on q1 unless you provide accurate arrow diagrams in support.  So please do study how to do those properly.  And we will also provide a review/study session for this purpose, probably on Tuesday night.
 
Most of you also did poorly on q2 (the reasoning over code), though that was probably in part a matter of time, and that was probably because many spent too much time on q3 (the free response).  While many of you did just fine on q3, many did not, which was surprising, given that I made two separate announcements that basically for sure there'd be a free response on one of wordSearch, connect4, or othello.  Sigh.  I had hoped for a near-perfect median on q3.  Didn't happen.
 
So:  we will have quiz6 this coming week, on Thursday in class.  It will cover exactly the same material as quiz5 covered:  2d lists and aliases, sets, maps, and especially the wordSearch, connect4, and othello case studies.  Please be very prepared.  Let's get a quiz median in the 90's!!!
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  The median on hw5 autograded was perfect (woohoo), but the manually graded part was not so strong.  The overall median was 73.5, which I believe was too low to properly reflect the effort on your part.  Many points were lost due to not properly showing work, especially on the Reasoning Over Code problems.  While such deductions were indeed warranted, I think the 73.5 median did not properly reflect effort or understanding on that hw.  So we adjusted the hw median (something we rarely do), by multiplying by 85/73.5, so the adjusted median is 85.  Still low, for a hw, but more reasonable.  Autolab reflects this change.
David
HI all.  Recitation is a go at this point for tomorrow.
 
We hope to have the midterms graded tonight.  That's a 50/50 proposition, I think.  If we manage it, then we will return the graded midterms in recitation tomorrow and go over the solutions.  Otherwise, we'll not do that (in which case we would either make it optional or just cancel it outright).  We won't know until maybe midnight tonight, so for now, please plan on attending recitation tomorrow.
 
Thanks.
 
David
So despite my post, there were questions posted to Piazza literally all night long (3am, 4am, 5am,...), the last one occurring within the hour.  So we had some students stay up all night, thinking they were "studying" for the exam today.  This is truly very poor judgment on their part.
 
But could we quantify it?
 
Yes!  I will later on compute the exam median for these students and compare it to the median for everyone else.  I am certain it will be much lower.
 
But...  I already looked at their current medians, and...  You guessed it!  The students staying up all night asking questions on Piazza are as a group scoring well below median in this course.
 
Staying up all night is fool's gold. It may seem like you can rob yourself of sleep and magically find extra time that other people do not have.  But it is a total myth.  You cannot do that.  It only feels like you can.  Because when you are sleep-deprived, the first thing to go is your ability to detect that you are sleep-deprived.  So you absolutely swear that you are just fine, thank you very much.  But you are not just fine.  You are compromising your ability to learn and to think clearly.  You are compromising your immune system and your sense of well-being.  You are driving up your stress levels, and driving down your learning and your grades.  Study after study after study has confirmed all of this and more.  This is not opinion.  Science says not sleeping is a total losing venture.

And more proof is right here in the numbers.  The students staying up all night absolutely are doing worse than those who are not.  There it is.
 
Stop doing this to yourself.  Start getting more sleep.  A lot more.  You may think you do not have time for that, but you have it completely backwards.  You don't have time NOT to get enough sleep.
 
Of course, the choice is yours.  College is about making your own choices, but it is also about facing the consequences for those choices.  And it is also about LEARNING from those consequences, so when you are making a pattern of bad choices, you can and should change and start making some better choices.
 
Get more sleep.
 
David
Hi all.  I have been very impressed by your dedication and general upbeat and motivated attitude in preparing for tomorrow's midterm.  Good job!
 
Now we're down to one last thing you must do now in order to do well tomorrow:  S L E E P !!!!
 
Really.  Truly.  There is nothing, nothing at all, that can justify staying up late tonight.  Any positives that you might imagine are there for you in the wee hours are WAY offset by the enormous negatives of staying up late, not getting enough sleep, and dogging it through the exam tomorrow.
 
Don't do that.  You've studied enough.  Stop studying.  And don't stress.  You've prepared enough.  You are ready.  Just relax, get some sleep, get a good breakfast, go for a quick walk to get the blood flowing, and then give it your best.  You'll be fine.
 
For now...  Good night!!!
 
Carpe noctum.
 
David
Hi all.  I hope to have the midterm to press by 12:30pm.  I may run a few minutes late.  in any case, I'll have OH until 2pm today.  Tomorrow, as usual for Thursdays, I'll have noon to 2pm OH.Hi all.  There has been a flood of requests on Piazza for answers to specific questions.  While we are happy to provide solutions for you, the course policy is that you need to get solutions in person.  This has proven to be quite effective, and we will stick with it.  As such, please do not post requests for specific solutions to Piazza.  Instead, attend solution sessions or office hours and we will be very happy to help.
 
Thanks.
 
DavidHi again.  Last post for the night!  :-)
 
First, congrats on finishing hw5.  The autograded median was 50/50, for the fifth straight perfect median on autograded hw.  Great job!!!
 
Now, regarding the midterm:  yes, you should prepare, but...  Do not overdo it.   Over the past 5 weeks, most of you have invested 50-75 hours into this course, some well over that.  And while some studying is a good idea, it's hard to imagine that amazing heroics this week that will make an enormous difference on top of that huge time investment you've made so far.  In fact, quite the opposite:  such heroics sadly tend to drive up stress (enormously) while driving down grades. Ugh.
 
And also remember that the midterm, while important, is only worth 5% of your grade (unless you do really well, then it can be worth 15% of your grade, but then that's a good thing!).  And the difference between, say, an A and a B, or a B and C, is just 0.5% of your semester grade.  Not enough to lose your balance over (not that anything is, but this certainly is not in any case!).
 
So:  study, yes. But keep it in perspective.  Keep your balance.  Study for other courses.  Get plenty of sleep.  Eat right.  Exercise, at least a bit.  Socialize a bit, too.  And of all those, sleep is the most important.  Sleep is gold.  Do not cut short your sleep to study for the midterm.  That approach always backfires.  Get your sleep, and study as time allows.  Not vice versa.
 
Carpe diem.

David
Hi all.  With hw5 (almost) behind us, it's time to focus on the upcoming midterm.  And then it's time to focus on the upcoming weekend without homework.  :-)
 
But first, about that midterm..  The CA's (thanks, CA's!!!) will be hosting the following optional midterm prep sessions:
 
Monday (tonight), 8-10 pm DH A302: HW5 Solution Session
 
Tuesday, lecture (9am-11:50am) in DH 2210: General review
 
 
Tuesday 8-9 pm WEH 7500: Week 1-2 review
Tuesday 9-10 pm WEH 7500: Week 3-4 review
Tuesday 10-11 pm WEH 7500: Week 5 review
 
Wednesday 8-9 pm WEH 7500: Practice Midterm Solution Session
Wednesday 9-10 pm WEH 7500: Week 3-4 review
Wednesday 10-11 pm WEH 7500: Week 1-2 review
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  As we approach the homestretch for hw5, here are some things to consider, especially for those who may be struggling so far:
 
* I commend you for your hard work.  Truly.  And you are learning a lot!  Look back at week1 and think how much easier it is now.  You have come a long way.  Kudos!!!
 
* Now: while you have completed about half the hw's and over half the quizzes, so far only 17% of the semester points (including hw5) are determined (assuming you already used the half-weighted hw's and quizzes).
 
* So that leaves 83% of the points still on the table.  That's a LOT of points that remain!
 
* Even after the upcoming midterm, that's still just 22% of the points, with 78% lying ahead.
 
* So: nobody who is participating actively in the course has assured themselves of failing.  Nobody.
 
* The lowest score of anyone who has done all the quizzes and hw's is 47.  And that student only needs to do mid-C work from here on out to receive a C at the semester, and low-D work to pass with a D.  So even with a low R so far, a C can be had by doing just mid-C work.  See?
 
* So:  everyone who has done all the homeworks and taken all the quizzes, every last one of you, is in a good position to get a C or higher at the semester.]
 
* However, there also are dozens of students who have not submitted a homework or have skipped at least one quiz.  Not doing work has definitely complicated things for you.  Even so...  Looking ahead, consider the immense value of just showing up:
 
  * Of the 20 students with the lowest grades, 17 have received a 0 on at least one hw or quiz.
  * Of the next 20, only 6 have done so.
  * And of the next 20, only 2 have done so.
 
See the pattern?  "Just showing up" is not a pathway to an A, but it *is* a pathway to passing.  So, for now, just show up.  Do the homework, take the quizzes and exams.  Just avoid taking 0's and you'll be off to a good start to making things much better.
 
So:  Don't panic.  But do take steps in the right direction.
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  You should know that you can corrupt the autograder's error messages if you destructively modify a list that it provides to your function.
 
In that case, the autograder will report back the *modified* list -- as though it was the original parameter provided to your function.

That is, because of your destructive function, the autograder basically misreports the error.
 
So if you get an error reported that just seems impossible, it is probably because it is.  In that case, look carefully at your function and consider if you are improperly modifying/destroying a list.
 
Good luck with it.Hi all.  The code from yesterday's optional/advance lecture is here:  codefrom92813.py
 
As is nearly always the case, the code does little justice to the topic, as the process of deriving the code is where all the fun lies.
 
Actually, we did two lectures back-to-back yesterday.  If you missed them, too bad, they were two of my favorite topics!  Fortunately, Charlie will do a reprise (later today, I think -- look for his post for details).
 
The first topic was countability and the Halting Problem.  Here we cover some magic mathematical truths (truly head-spinning stuff), and then see how it leads to some very strong if unfortunate constraints on what we can ever know about how arbitrary programs do or do not work.  Awesome stuff.
 
The second topic was finding the coefficients of the polynomial solutions to power sums.  For example, we all know 1+...+n = n**2/2 + n/2.  But what does 1**2 + .... + n**2 equal?  Or 1**3 + ... + n**3?  This turns out to be a great exercise in top-down design, as we first reduced the problem to fitting a polynomial through N points, which we then reduced to solving a system of N linear equations in N unknowns, which we then reduced to inverting a matrix, which we further reduced to a series of matrix multiplications.  Fascinating math, fun programming, very satisfying result.
 
Again, Charlie will run the reprise, and it is 100% optional, but I highly recommend it, as this is some of the best material we'll see all semester (or so I think).
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  We did not cover this, but it is in the notes, and you should know it since it can be very handy at times, and it is simple enough.  And... It may appear on the midterm or future quizzes or exams.  Here it is:
 
1.  To convert a string to a list of characters:  use list(s)
 
# use list(s) to convert a string to a list of characters
a = list("wahoo!")
print a # prints: ['w', 'a', 'h', 'o', 'o', '!']
 
 
 
2. To convert a list of characters to a string:  use "".join(a)
 
# use "".join(a) to convert a list of characters to a single string
s = "".join(a)
print s # prints: wahoo!
 
3. To convert a list of strings to a string:  also use "".join(a)
 
Note:  Python does not distinguish from a single character and a string, so the previous example works just fine with longer strings:
 
# "".join(a) also works on a list of strings (not just single characters)
a = ["parsley", " ", "is", " ", "gharsley"] # by Ogden Nash!
s = "".join(a)
print s # prints: parsley is gharsley
4. Using Lists to Avoid Inefficiencies of Strings
 
This is in the notes and indeed this part you can safely ignore, as you are not responsible for it.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.

David
Hi all.
 
 
Quick aside: reminder that today's optional/advanced lecture is at 11am in WEH 7500.
 
Now, the point of this post, regarding grading: hw4 grades are now released, and so all grades are current in Autolab (great job, CA's!).
 
You should all carefully review your STYLE grades, in particular. The median on hw4 style was 6/10, so there is plenty of room for improvement there. And these are basically free points, so please do read the style comments and get all 10/10 style points on hw5 and beyond.
 
Heading into hw5 and the midterm, the overall median course average is 89.6, which is quite strong, if a bit artificially high (because we've not yet had any exams). Nice job! The max grade right now is 104.3, which is very strong, but there are quite a few scores right behind? The current cutoff for the bottom quartile is 80 (so 75% of you have scores of 80 or higher), and the bottom decile is 65 (so 90% of you have scores of 65 or higher).
 
Those of you currently in the bottom decile should not despair. But you should keep working, keep taking advantage of all the resources we have discussed so much. In particular, surely you will be very well served by attending as many of these week5 practice sessions as you can. Heading into the midterm, nothing will help more now than structured practice, as these sessions followed by your continued studying would provide.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  About 20 students attended tonight's practice session, which is a good start, but frankly is not really enough, given where we are at right now.  Some of you no doubft had time conflicts (understandable, of course).  And some others are doing just fine with, say, a 95 quiz average, and really do not need these sessions.  But for the rest of you...
 
Many (though surely not all) of you are fixating on finishing the hw rather than learning the material.  Ironically, the fastest way to finish the hw is to instead focus on learning the material.  So by trying to speed up the hw you are instead slowing it down.  And learning less.  Ugh.
Also, one of the key requests from the townhall meeting last week was that we provide lots more CA-led practice sessions.  Well, here they are.  We are providing them.  Now it's your turn to step up and actually use them!
 
Seriously, this is a big win, and will help a lot, but only if you are there.
 
I hope to hear about much greater attendance in the remaining sessions:
 
Sat 12-2pm in GHC 4307 (Joel C.)
Sat 4-6pm in GHC 4307 (Charlie) quiz4 solutions review  (reprise of Friday 6-8)
Sat 6-8pm in GHC 4307 (Wang) quiz4 solutions review 
Sun 6-8pm in BH 125C (Andre)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Otherwise it would be a silly question, of course.  :-)
Hi all.  For those who qualified with Larry Powell's office for extra time on exams, you should contact Larry directly to schedule your midterm, which will be proctored through his office.  You may take it any time on Thursday.
 
Good luck!Hi again.  Of course, those week5 review sessions are really good midterm prep sessions, too!  In addition, the following sessions will be provided:
 
* Tuesday (in class): Big-O and binary and general topic review of all weeks

* Tuesday night (in WEH 7500):
8-9: weeks 1-2 
9-10: weeks 3-4 
10-11: week 5 

* Wednesday night (in WEH 7500):
8-9: week 5 reprise (with different problems) 
9-10: weeks 3-4 reprise (with different problems) 
10-11: weeks 1-2 reprise (with different problems) 
 
And then:  be sure to get enough sleep!!!

Carpe diem.

David
Hi all.  In response to student requests, this week we are providing a large assortment of optional CA-led practice sessions, where CA's will work out detailed solutions to a variety of problems (where the problems differ at nearly every session). 

These should not only prepare you for hw5, but also for the upcoming midterm, and of course for everything after that, too! :-) 

You may attend any and all sessions you wish. The more you attend, presumably the more they will help!
 
Here is the schedule:
   http://www.kosbie.net/cmu/fall-13/15-112/handouts/week5-practice.html
 
Carpe diem.Hi all.  I have received a few requests about this, so...  You may bring your parents to the optional/advanced lecture if you wish.  I can't guarantee they'll follow everything we do, but they are welcome to try!  I'll also try to keep it to a PG-13 lecture.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.Hi again.  Please use Piazza for questions that go to the entire staff (private questions to "Instructors").
 
If you want to contact an individual, including me, please use email and not Piazza.  You will get faster response times that way, and we get appropriate routing and archiving in our inboxes rather than Piazza.
 
Thanks.

David
Hi again.  For those who might be interested:
 
Based on your responses yesterday, I discussed this with Dean Cortina, and...  The fun 15-112++ projects course (with 15-112 as a pre-req) was tentatively approved.  Yahoo!  It will not be for the coming spring semester, though, but rather starting next fall, tentatively as a 6-unit second-half mini.  We'd meet for 2 hours each week where we'd do something similar to this semester's optional/advanced lectures, so I'd just write a bunch of code (with your steady input, of course) getting started on a fun project.  Then I'd hand it off to you and you'd have 10 hours to get the rest of it working.  Then in the last few weeks you'd probably do another 15-112-style term project.  It'd be ok to work in small groups, I think, at least for most of the time. The course would be for non-CS students interested in having fun programming at an intermediate level.  It would probably be a 100-level course, for what it's worth, but numbers are not yet assigned.  In any case, sounds like good fun!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 Hi all.  The next optional/advanced lecture will be tomorrow (Saturday) from 11am to 1pm in 7500 Wean Hall.  Should be fun!  The reprise will be Sunday night. 
 
Note that I am constrained on both ends timewise, and should be on time but just may be a few minutes late.  On the back end, I have to race off right at 1pm to go watch my son's football game (Saturday game because it's homecoming).
 
Also, I'll have to miss it (darn), but you might want to catch CMU's football game Saturday at 1pm, featuring some of your 15-112 classmates!  Go Tartans!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Once again, the CA's did same-day grading of quizzes.  Awesome!
 
The adjusted quiz4 grades are in Autolab.  In a semester where you have been doing very well on the whole, these scores were, well, not so awesome...
 
The adjusted median, by magic of course, is 70.  :-)   The adjusted max is 109.  The raw median, though, was 57, which is low.  From the grading session, it is apparent that many of you need more work (maybe a LOT more work) on big-o and bitwise operators.
 
We will post the midterm review session plan soon.  It will include sessions devoted to those topics.  I strongly recommend that anyone scoring below median on quiz4 attend those sessions, since big-o and bitwise operators will definitely be on the midterm next week.

Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  I'll post the official writeup later today, but here is the complete plan for hw5 (all of which is SOLO!), except for the bonus which I'll add later.  But this is the entire non-bonus portion:
 
Do all (except bonus) from s13 hw5 and also do solvesCryptarithm from f12 hw5a.
 
As a nod to parents weekend, this will all be due Monday night, though at 8pm (not 10pm).  Even so, you should seriously try to get a jump on it asap.  You'll want to save next week to prepare for the midterm (though, of course, all of hw5 also prepares you for the midterm).
 
Also, at the request of numerous students, in addition to tomorrow night's session, we will provide even more week5 optional practice sessions.  We will be certain to cover problems that would make for solid practice on week5 material and also make hw5 go easier for you.  We will publish the schedule of these sessions after we have our staff meeting later tonight.
 
Carpe diem.

DavidI may make a lot of posts, but you still have to read them all.  Besides, many provide immediate and important help for the hw.
 
For example, Piazza is overwhelmed by students asking about why their Tkinter import line at the top of their file is making Autolab give them a 0.  In some cases, students lost HOURS on this.

Of course this was already answered by me on Piazza.  Twice.
 
Please read my Piazza posts.  They are there to SAVE you time.
 
David
Hi all.  This should be abundantly clear, but since some have asked, you obviously cannot submit the hw after attending a hw solution session!Hi all. As I sensed, the poll confirmed that a heavy majority of you prefer that the midterm be moved back to Thursday of next week (along with the other parts of that package deal).
 
 
And so it shall be. I'll post the amended schedule soon, but for now, you can plan on the midterm being on Thursday of next week, and there not being any hw assigned on the weekend after the midterm. Then there is no required hw again just two weekends later during mid-semester break, so you have a couple of rest points just ahead of you!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  I slightly amended the plan for Wednesday, so we'll start with quiz4 review that night.  In any case, here is the (approximate) plan for tonight and tomorrow night, including links to previous quizzes that will be covered in case you want to first try them under quiz conditions):
 
Tuesday (tonight):
    8-8.50 pm: HW4 Solution Session
    8.50-9.20 pm: Quiz3 Solution Session
    9.20-10 pm: Quiz4 Review Session (S12 Quiz4, except for Q4)
 
 
Wednesday:
    8-8.40 pm: Quiz4 Review Session going through (F11 Quiz3)
    8.40-9.30 pm: HW4 Solution Session (reprise)
    9.30-10 pm: Quiz3 Solution Session (reprise)
 
As usual, these optional sessions meet in 7500 Wean Hall.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  We are going to do things just a bit differently this week.  We will cover all of quiz3 solutions, hw4 solutions, and quiz4 practice on BOTH Tuesday and Wednesday nights (Edison Tuesday, Jordan Wednesday), 8-10pm, in 7500 Wean Hall.  The quiz3 and hw4 parts will be the same both nights, but the quiz4 practice sessions will cover different problems.  To help with your scheduling, the quiz4 practice will start at 9:20pm.  Attend any or all parts of either or both nights as you wish.
Carpe diem.
Hi again.  Just so we're all on the same page here:
 
* My OH are open.  Everyone is invited.  No appointments are either necessary or even possible.
 
 * Do not stand in the hall!  Come on in!  We have plenty of seats.  And besides, if you stand in the hall, I will not know you are there and you will never get your turn.  Yikes.  So just come on in!  (Of course, in theory there is some outer limit to how many can be in my office, but in practice this is rarely if ever a concern.)
 
 * As with hw OH, mine can sometimes have long queues (sorry).  But please do not be daunted by this!  Please join the queue, especially if you have a question that cannot be easily answered on Piazza or in hw OH.
 
* Every topic is fair game in general, from OH to hw help to questions or concerns about the course to your computing future to really anything else.
 
 * My regular weekly OH are Tue/Thu noon to 2pm.  I try to have other times, too, but all other times vary each week.  But you can bank on me being in my office Tue/Thu noon to 2pm, door open, schedule cleared, with nothing on my mind but helping you.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  I will have open office hours today from 4pm to 6pm.
 
Also, several students have asked for appointments to discuss private concerns of theirs, and so to accommodate these requests I will stay after 6pm for short private meetings.  Please do not use that time for anything (such as tutoring or hw help) that could be handled during general office hours (mine or the CA's).
 
Thanks.
 
David
Hi all.  As the poll made very clear, most of you preferred Thursday for quiz4.  And so it shall be.  I'll post the optional evening review schedule later today, but you should anticipate something similar to last week's.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.
 
Hi all. To help us give you the best support we can, please give us anonymous feedback on your CA's and then also on a few others if they stand out (one way or the other) in your opinion.
 
 
Please fill out this form once for each CA you wish to evaluate.
 
    http://tinyurl.com/m2hytxh
 
This is the first CA evaluation of the semester. There will be another one later on. Thanks.
 
David
Hi again.  You may place your test functions anywhere, really, but it's best (and more consistent, and safer) to place them BELOW the #ignore_rest line (unless we explicitly say we are autograding your test functions, which we may).
 
However, and this is important:  do not place any top-level code (that is, code outside a def statement, except for some import statements that the def statements need) above the #ignore_rest line.
 
In particular, do not actually CALL your test functions from above the #ignore_rest line.  Why?  Because autolab then must run your tests first before any of its tests.  And if any of your tests fail, then you will score 0.  Ugh.  But place it below #ignore_rest, and it is... ignored!  :-)
 
The rule of thumb is:
  All autograded code ABOVE the #ignore_rest line.
 
And
  All non-autograde code BELOW the #ignore_rest line.
 
Carpe diem.

David
Hi all.  As some of you push a bit to finish hw4, this may cheer you up:
 
To help you better prepare for the upcoming midterm, as well as to give you a well-earned breather, hw5 will be a lighter hw.  It will also include some midterm prep directly in the hw, rather than just focusing on new material.  Also, as previously announced, lists (which we cover this week) will not be on the midterm.  So you have now seen everything that will be on the midterm.
 
So: keep pressing on hw4, but know that some relief is around the corner.
 
Carpe diem.

David
You can and should import string for hw4.  Above the #ignore_rest line, since you may need it for your autograded functions.Hi all.  It's not even 3 minutes later and already maybe 5 or 6 students have burned a submission and scored 0 because they have their Tkinter import line above their #ignore_rest line.
 
Place all your autograded code above the #ignore_rest line.
 
Place all your non-autograded code, including your graphics code, including your graphics import, below that line.
 
If you don't, you'll score 0.
 
Sigh.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David
Hi all.  In light of the hard work so many of you are putting into hw4, I think it's best for us to reduce the late penalty from 25 points to just 10 points this week (and just this week).  You still have a Monday deadline, but if you miss that, you may submit up until Tuesday at 10pm for just a 10-point deduction.
 
That said, we will not be able to staff Tuesday OH heavily, and we will also have a course-related optional session Tuesday from 8-10pm (I'll announce that and all of this coming week's plans and all the midterm prep plans tomorrow).  So please plan accordingly.
 
Good luck with hw4.
 
David
Hi all.  As we've discussed in class, we are slowly weaning you off the various supports to the point where you start from a blank file and have no autograder at all.  We're getting there...
 
This week, here are the changes
  * No starter file (you knew that)
  * Autograder posted even later (and you can spot this trend and predict what happens for hw5...)
  * Now you have ONLY TEN (10) autolab submissions this week (use them wisely!!!)
 
A couple very important hints:
 
1) Be really certain to use those 10 submissions wisely, because when they are gone, they are gone.  So don't submit until you are confident in all your solutions, and your own test code passes.  Then after submitting, if you don't get the score you are seeking, very carefully review every single error autolab reports and try to fix all of them before resubmitting.
 
2) Be sure to place all your graphics code, including your Tkinter import, below the #ignore_rest line.  If you place that import above the #ignore_rest line, the autograder will fail and you'll have wasted a submission (bummer).
 
Good luck!

David
Hi all.  So far we have one Academic Integrity violation this semester, and that happened on a quiz (sigh).  Of course, one is one too many.  Still, it means nearly all of you are doing this right, working hard, collaborating, but within the rules.  Wahoo!
 
Although...  It appears that there may be too much informal collaborating on the solo hw (since, well, any is too much).  You are not allowed to discuss these problems with anyone outside of the course staff.  We do not want to see if others can solve them.  We want to see if you can solve them.
 
Please adhere to the rules, since this is the best way for you to learn this material.  Also, since violating the rules will lead to undesirable consequences.  Plus, we have tons of supports for you, so use those.
 
In any case, please play by the rules.
 
Thanks.
 
David
Hi all.  First, I applaud all the hard work from all of you.  And what's more, for most of you, you are seeing solid returns, what with a median right now just over 90.  Wow.  That's great!!!!
 
But I also understand some of you are not seeing the fruits of your labor just yet.  For those with semester grades currently 60 or lower in particular, I understand how frustrating this can be.  We have no easy answers for you.  We do have lots of supports for you, and lots of suggestions on how to use those resources most effectively.  But in the end, there is no easy answer.  Just lots of sustained hard work and being smart about using resources and understanding that in time things will go your way.
 
That said...  I would like to meet with some students who are in that group, particularly with semester grades 60 or lower right now.  I hope some of you might meet me at my office today at 3:45pm today to discuss your situation and how we might improve it.
 
This is entirely optional.  Of course.
 
And...  Anything we talk, if it leads to policy changes, would then apply to anyone in the course.  So it's not like you have to be there today to gain the benefits of this conversation.
 
I just want to hear from you, discuss your experiences, and form a plan for us to better serve your needs.
 
Again, entirely optional.
 
Thanks.
 
David
Hi all.  The hw4 circular graphics problem is posted.  It should be relatively straightforward (though hopefully also somewhat interesting and fun).  Good luck with it.
Hi all.  I awoke to see lots of students asking why they could not see their grades in Autolab.  I have no idea why it unreleased your grades (sigh), but I just re-released them, so now everyone should be able to see them.  If you have any Autolab issues, viewing grades or otherwise, please do let us know.  Thanks, and sorry for the inconvenience.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Hw3 is now graded.  You should check your autolab comments, since these include the style grades.  At this stage, most students lose some style points, and many students lost ALL the style points.  The way to improve is to read the CA's comments and try not to repeat those style errors on hw4.
 
Speaking of style, here's a hint:  do not add style at the end.  That's silly, just creating extra work.  No.  Use good style all along.  Because it will save you tons of time, even if it seems like it takes extra time.  That extra time pays off huge dividends in decreased bugs and quicker debugging.
 
Anyhow, returning to grades:  the median hw average is now 95, and the median quiz average is now just over 73 (higher than 70 due to the half-weighting of each student's lowest 2 quizzes).  The overall course average median is now 90.3.  Meaning:  if the semester ended now, just over half of you would get A's.  Of course, this will come back down from the stratosphere once we get some exams in the grade computation.  But even so, it is very strong, and bodes well.
 
Let's keep up the momentum!
 
Carpe diem.
 Hi all.  Each semester, I give a series of optional/advanced lectures.  These are about 2 hours long and cover topics a bit beyond our curriculum but not too much.  I move faster than in our main lectures and maybe some folks might not follow every last detail, but that's ok in this setting (unlike in the main course!).  Attendance is purely optional, and in fact has no bearing on your grade in 15-112 (we don't take attendance and have no way to know who attends).
 
I'll give the first optional/advanced lecture tomorrow from 1:30 to 3:30pm in GHC 4307 (the room holds just over 70, which I figure should be enough seats, as this is not something everyone typically attends, though anyone interested is indeed invited!).  Topic TBD, but likely one of the early topics from last semester's optional lectures (which you can check out in last semester's online schedule).
 
Carpe diem.

David
Hi all.  I will have an extra hour of OH today from 4-5pm.  See (some of) you then!  :-)
 
Carpe diem.

DavidHi all.  Here are a few hw4 updates:
 
* unboundedNumberGuessing examples fixed 
The examples contained two typos.  Sigh.  But they are fixed.  Thanks to the eagle-eyed students who caught this!
 
* points added
The exercises now have point values, in case this helps you allocate your time.  For example, note that each of the somewhat-tricky bitwise operator functions is only worth 1.5 points, so probably not worth investing hours and hours if you get stuck on one of them.

* encodeRightLeftRouteCipher hint added
This is a useful hint:  the grid is only conceptual. Your code will never actually construct a 2-dimensional grid (especially as you may not yet use lists!). Instead, you should use a clever scheme of indexing the message string where you translate a row and column into a single index into the message string. 
hw4 edited
 
Good luck!
 
David
Hi all.  Quiz3 is now graded (same-day grading!).  The raw median turned out to be a very respectable 65.  That's really solid for this quiz.  Nice job!  In any case, raw scores were adjusted by multiplying by 70/65 and rounding (so the adjusted median is 70).  Adjusted scores are entered in Autolab.
 
Also, quiz3 is now linked into the course website.
 
And, as usual, graded quiz3's will be returned in recitation today.
 
I had mentioned in the 9am lecture that we'll provide some means of remediation for students who struggled on quiz3 (though also mentioned later that this might not include an alternate quiz).  I will discuss this with CA's and students over the next few days and form a plan for students who are struggling the most.  I'll be in touch with details then.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Hw4 is out there now.  It just needs one small circular graphics problem (as we did manage to do that today in class), and maybe a second bonus problem.
 
With 95% of it good-to-go, the deadline shall remain Monday at 10pm.  The rest will be there soon.
 
Enjoy!  :-)

David
It's probably a good idea to know what s.split(c) does, and also what int(s) does.  And be sure to use top-down design with a well-chosen helper function or two on the free response, since it will save you lots of time and will also make it much easier to get partial credit if things go a bit awry for some reason.  :-)
 
In any case, don't stay up too late tonight.
 
Good luck.
 
David
Hi all.  I need to see where we get tomorrow before finalizing hw4, so...  As with hw3, we'll pre-release some today and then make the whole thing due Monday.
 
This hw again is SOLO.  With that in mind, you can get a jump by starting on these tonight if you wish:
 
* s13 quiz4, all except #8
 
* f12 hw4b (which says collaborative but this semester it is not!), all except #8.
 
* findZeroWithBisection from s13 hw3
 
More problems will be posted tomorrow.  Meanwhile, for my own edification, I ask that you please email me tonight if you finish all of these by then.  Thanks, and good luck!
 
Carpe diem.

David

Hi all.  Please note that my OH tomorrow (Thursday) will be a bit later than usual, from 4-6pm.  Thanks.Hi all.  Despite good intentions, do not use Piazza as a public forum.  There are just too many of you, and mayhem would ensue.  Actually, what would happen is that the number of posts would exceed anyone's ability to track them, and students would basically stop reading every relevant post, which would be a serious problem.
 
So:  do not make public posts.  Period.
 
If you have something that you think is of general interest, send it to me and I may post it (or may not, but maybe yes).
 
I didn't want to get here, but...  Anyone who makes another public post may face the suspension of their Piazza account.
 
David
Hi all.  If you wish to (optionally) first do the quizzes under quiz conditions before (optionally) attending tonight's quiz review session, here are the quizzes that will be reviewed tonight:
 
Quiz 4 F11:
http://www.kosbie.net/cmu/fall-11/15-112/handouts/quiz4.html
 
 
Quiz 5 F12:
http://www.kosbie.net/cmu/fall-12/15-112/handouts/quiz5.html
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Many of you have rightly complained that s[::-1] is simply gross.  It is.  Yet, amazingly, there is no built-in way to easily reverse a string in Python.
 
You could do this:
   "".join(reversed(s))
 
But that's gross, too.

What are you to do?
 
I would recommend a well-named helper function:
 
def reverse(s):
     # nice helper function to make reversing a string more readable
    return s[::-1]
 
Now you can do reverse(s) instead of s[::-1].  Sweet.

reverse("divaD

meid epraC")
Hi all.  Well, it was another very strong week for you collectively, as the median score on hw3's autograded portion is 75/75.  That's a good median!  :-) 
 
Now, despite this very strong showing, many of you scored below 75, and a fairly large number scored substantially lower.  This is not cause for panic, but it is cause for some action.
 
Unless you aced hw3 and thoroughly understand it, I strongly recommend that you attend the optional hw3 solution review session tonight (8-9pm, with a duplicate from 9-10pm).  (Of course, once you attend you cannot submit hw3.)
 
Even if you scored well on hw3, you may benefit from seeing a CA present their solutions.
 
Also, this is a reminder of all the extra sessions planned for this week:
 
Tue 17-Sep (tonight), 8-9pm + duplicate 9-10pm: hw3 solution review
Wed 18-Sep, 8-8:40pm + 8:40-9:20pm: quiz3 practice
Thu 19-Sep, 8-10pm: hw4-related practice problems
Attendance is optional at each of these.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  A number of you are "debugging" by staring at a wall of code and hoping for some inspiration.  That is awesome when it works, but usually it doesn't.  There is a much more mechanical yet predictably effective way to do it.  Something like this:
 
 
First: what exactly did Autolab say was wrong? For each error, it will give you an input and the expected output and then the observed output. What is that?
 
Second: run that very same test yourself, and watch your code produce the observed output.
 
Third: add a lot of print statements to your code, printing out variable values at different points. Then again run the offending test, and very carefully look at the printed output. At some point, something goes wrong. Usually, this process helps you quickly locate where the problem is (which then helps you quickly determine what the problem is).
 
This is an amazingly effective process that nearly always works.  Be sure to regularly use it!  Even if it does not work, it will usually give you some insights, and in any case will help you ask more focused questions that we can answer (since we cannot answer the "where is my bug?" question).
 
Good luck with it.
 
David
Hi again.  A few things:
 
1) I will have OH tonight from 5-6pm.
 
2) The CA's will have OH from 6-10pm, but not in the usual place.  Instead, they will be in the GHC 3rd floor cafe area.
 
3) As is true every week, OH queues were basically non-existent two days ago, and were steady but manageable yesterday, but:  they will be very long tonight.  There is little we can do about it.  The CA's will do their best to manage the queue, but understand that if you wait until the last minute rush hour, then you will be stuck in rush hour traffic.  Also, at that point the CA's really have to focus on quick answers.  If you have a "where is my bug?" or, worse, "how do I get started?" sort of question, they may not be able to help you at that time.  Basically, any question requiring more than 15-30 seconds to answer is not appropriate for OH during the last couple hours, when many dozens of students are queued up with short debugging questions.
 
Upshot #1: be understanding tonight.   The CA's will do their best.  You'll do your best.  And that will have to be good enough.
 
Upshot #2: if you are pressed against tonight's deadline, learn from the experience and change your approach for hw4.  Remember, the most effective approach involves getting tutoring and caught up as much as possible early in the week (Monday, Tuesday), then really studying the notes and doing simple practice problems (Tuesday, Wednesday, and perhaps Thursday), then getting an early jump on the homework (Wednesday, Thursday, Friday), so that you are very well on your way as the weekend starts.  And plan to finish well before the deadline.  These things almost always lead to positive results.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi again.  Even among those who have learned the basics, another misjudgment is leading to huge amounts of lost time.
 
Be sure to really, truly follow Polya.
 
Step 1 is to understand the problem.  We have students who were several hours into the circular prime and smith prime problems, only to post questions about why this number is or is not such a number.  That means they did not really do Step 1, as they did not fully understand the problem.  Which leads to this question:  just what problem were they solving all that time?  Yikes.
 
Step 2 is to solve the problem without Python.  Before you write a line of code, understand how your solution is going to work.  Skipping this step is a major mistake, and it will cost tons of time in the end.  If you just start writing code, you may well get something that is somewhat close to a working solution.  But without a clear understanding of that solution, you'll likely be reduced to almost randomly poking and prodding your code in the hopes of making it work.  That is NOT how to solve problems.  And it can be an infinite time sink.  Double yikes
 
About one-fourth of the class is completely done with hw3, including students from all parts of our curve (so it's not only top performers).  If you study the material first, and do practice problems until you are somewhat comfortable with it, and then you adhere to Polya, this hw is feasible.  But if you skip any of that, then it may not be feasible.  Especially since some of you have left a large chunk of the homework until today, which leads to the next announcement...
 
Anyhow, to wrap up this one:  please follow Polya.  If you do not, you will likely pay for it in hours of lost time and increased frustration.
 
David
Hi all.  Some of you are unfortunately continuing to make this basic misjudgment: you figure it's best to dive right into the homework before you really understand the material.  Again, it's just some of you, but if you are in that group, you are making life much, much more difficult for yourself.
 
Consider:  we have students trying to solve some challenging strings-loops-and-conditionals problems in hw3 when they cannot, say, write a function that says if a string contains a vowel, or a function that determines how many characters two strings have in common.  There is no way that ends well.  And predictably, it is not going well.
 
This is not an issue of effort, as many of these students are trying hard.  Very hard.  But they are going about it wrong, and so they are burning many hours with almost nothing to show for it.  Instead, that time should have been spent studying the notes, then doing practice problems, working in groups (since that's not the hw, groups are fine!), working with CA's, studying and learning the material.
 
Then and only then should you start the hw.  If you do not understand the basics, stop doing the hw, and go back to study and learn them.  You may feel that you do not have time to do that.  That's backwards.  You do not have time NOT to do that.
 
Learn the basics first, study and practice some simple problems first, and then move on to the hw.
 
Good luck!
 
David
Hi all.  Our CA's are awesome (they are!), and they work incredibly hard (they do!) and they are very happy to help you (again, they are!).

But...
 
Please be respectful of their time.  In particular, please be sure to show up when you sign up for a tutoring session.
 
It is unacceptable for a CA to get over to Gates early Sunday morning (or any other time, of course) only to have their students not be there at the appointed time and place.
 
I'd rather not have a policy on no-shows. I'd very much rather that we all be more reasonable and considerate and that we simply not have no-shows.
 
Of course, emergencies and such happen.  That's not what we're talking about here.  Even in those cases, though, please email your CA as far ahead as possible to reschedule.
 
Thanks.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
It does not include autograding for the bonus.  As usual, you should resist rapidly resubmitting to the autograder.  Always test your code thoroughly first before submitting.
 
Also:  do not hardcode any autograder tests in your code!!!  So, for example, if the autograder says your function foo fails since foo(123) should return 456 but yours did not, you cannot do this:
    def foo(n):
        if (n == 123): return 456  # hardcoded to get past autograder
        ....
That would be quite unacceptable!
 
Good luck!
 
David
Hi all.  Can you please check your Autolab account information and verify that the section listed there is the one you are attending?  If there is a discrepancy, please send me email today, including both the section you think are enrolled in and the one listed in Autolab.
 
Note that if you have the wrong section assigned in Autolab, then your CA's will be unable to see your grades, which will make it much harder for them to provide high-quality guidance and tutoring for you.
 
Also note that most of our sections are actually overfull, and in some cases there aren't seats for everyone, so everyone must attend the sections they are assigned to, at least for now.
 
Thanks.
 
David
Hi all.  As the subject says, the Section Exchange is now completed.  I sent email to everyone who we were able to accommodate.  Of those requests within a lecture, or from lecture 1 to lecture 2, we were able to accommodate nearly all the requests.  Unfortunately, we were able to accommodate very few requests from lecture 2 to lecture 1 (sorry).
 
Carpe diem.

David
Hi all.  Seeing as we've not yet covered it, the previous-semester quiz3 problem that uses try/except is optional and worth a tiny bit of bonus.
 
Cheers.
 
David
The first 50 pts are just as advertised yesterday.
 
The rest should give you some good practice with strings.
 
Have fun!

David
Hi again.  Please note that I have to reschedule tomorrow's office hours instead to Friday, still noon to 2pm.
 
Thanks.
 
David
Hi all.  The rest of hw3 will be posted tomorrow.  As a consequence, hw3 will be due MONDAY night, so you all have the same amount of time on it.  Actually, since part of hw3 was already posted, this means you wind up getting a little EXTRA time.  What a deal!  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Important addendum!  Hw3 is entirely solo, like hw2!
 
David
Hi all.  Some have asked for at least some of hw3 to be posted now so they can get started.  Sure thing.
 
Here is part of it.  The rest will be posted, along with the official writeup, starter file, etc, later today.
 
For now:
 
#1 (just like #1 from hw2):
From s12 quiz5: #1, strings portion
From s13 practice quiz3 (just Code Tracing + Reasoning Over Code)
From s13 quiz3 (all)
 
#2: from f12 hw3:
nthCircularPrime
nthSmithNumber
 
More coming soon, but now you can get started!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Rosters have stabilized enough that we can now do our once-a-semester optional section exchange.  If you think you'd prefer for any reason (schedule or otherwise) to attend a different section, or if you are ambivalent but would be ok making room for someone to join your current section, then please fill out this entirely optional form today:
 
  http://tinyurl.com/15-112-f13-section-exchange
 
The form closes tonight.  I will make the section exchanges tomorrow and announce them via email to each student whose section changes.
 
Again, this is entirely optional. Fill out this form if you are interested in perhaps switching sections. While we most likely cannot satisfy everyone's requests, the more who participate, the more likely it is we can accommodate most of you.

Note that Sections A-K attend the 10:30 lecture, and sections L-O attend the 9am lecture. As space opens, we may allow people to attend the other lecture, but for now, you have to attend the lecture that matches your section. So make your preferences on the form accordingly.
 
 
Thanks, and good luck!
 
David
Hi all.  Thanks to the awesome efforts of our CA's, quiz2 was graded last night!  The grades are posted in Autolab.  And the results are a great step forward!  The unadjusted median was 70.  Wahoo!  Huzzah!  And since Autolab is a bit funny in how it computes medians (it includes students who are enrolled but did not take the quiz, and so it under-reports medians by a bit), and also to throw you something of a bone for all your great efforts, we included a 1.03% adjustment (also already included in your Autolab scores), so even Autolab thinks the median was 70 (now it's higher, in fact).  Top score was 100, bottom score 3.
 
This is a solid collective performance.  It definitely shows a few things:
  * solo works better than collaborative,
  * you are all working very hard, and
  * you are all learning a lot and improving rapidly.
Kudos!!!
 
Now, there is still work to be done!  For everyone!  But especially for the large group who scored 60 or lower on the quiz, and especially those who scored 40 or lower.  Keep working hard!  Go to the optional sessions, starting tonight.  Also get private tutoring (there are not enough CA hours for everyone to get private tutoring, but the lowest-scoring students should be able to arrange some).  And go to CA office hours.  And my office hours.  And Academic Development's walk-in tutoring.  Work the problem.  Keep studying.  Keep at it.  You'll be fine.
 
In any case, the non-adjusted median of 70 is a great step forward.  Great job, everyone!!!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  We are also going to experiment with what we hope is a kinder, gentler quiz schedule next week.  Quiz3 will be moved to Thursday 19-Sep.  That will allow us to also provide the following optional extra sessions (all in 7500 Wean Hall) next week to help you better prepare for the quiz:

  Tue 17-Sep, 8-9pm + duplicate 9-10pm:  hw3 solution review

  Wed 18-Sep, 8-8:40pm + 8:40-9:20pm:  quiz3 practice

  Thu 19-Sep, 8-10pm:  hw4-related practice problems
 
We will provide more details as the sessions approach, but for now you can pencil these in on your calendars.  We do not expect everyone to attend ever session.  These are just more resources for you to use as needed.
 
Carpe diem.

David
Hi all.  For those wanting a bit of extra practice, we will offer the following extra practice sessions this week:
 
Wed (tomorrow), 8-9:20pm, 7500 Wean Hall:  covers weeks 1-2
Thu, 8-10pm, 7500 Wean Hall, covers week 3
 
These are not lectures, but rather will do practice problems interactively.
 
The week3 session is not an office hour, so it will not focus on the problems assigned in hw3.  However, it will include lots of problems related to those problems, so indeed it should help.
 
We encourage everyone to attend, but especially if you feel you may need a bit of extra help with this material.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Once you attend a hw solution session, you may no longer submit that hw, whether or not you take a late penalty.  Of course!!!  :-)
Hi all. In addition to all the other tutoring and OH today, we have these optional review sessions for you:
 
    * 6:30 to 8:30pm in DH 1212
and a duplicate session (so you would probably only attend one of these, and then optionally, if you think you need the help):
    * 8 to 10pm in HH B131

The sessions are booked for 2 hours, but may run shorter (and you could leave earlier, of course, no problem).
 
In these sessions the CA's will cover:
    * quiz1 solutions review (for the first 10 minutes only)
    * hw2 solutions review
    * quiz2 prep

Carpe diem.
David
Hi all.  Great collective job on hw2!  Fully 68% of you scored a perfect 55/55 on the autograded portion.  Nice job!  Despite this, however, exactly 50 of you scored 30/55 or lower, and 19 scored 10/55 or lower.   If you are in one of those latter groups, don't despair.  But do act!  Today!!!
 
To start with, there are office hours.  Mine are noon to 2pm Monday (today), Tuesday, and Thursday this week.

The CA's of course have tons of OH, too!
 
And Academic Development has walk-in tutoring tonight.
 
And you can set up tutoring sessions with your CA's.
 
Lots of options.  Use them wisely!!!

Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  As some have asked:  after the deadline, you have an additional 24 hours to make a late submission at a 25-point penalty.  Note that if you make any late submission, then you get the penalty even if this results in a lower grade than what you had at the original deadline.
 
Note that if you submit past 10pm, it is automatically a late submission, so be careful about that.
 
In any case, it's best to get it done on time, of course, but if you have a fairly low score, it may well be best to take the 25-point penalty and continue working another day (though please do not make a habit of this).
 
That's it for tonight's announcements (I hope).  Good luck wrapping up hw2.
 
David
Hi again.  Some of you seem to have done lots of work, but are scoring 0 on the autograder for some kind of technical issue.  If you are in that situation, get to a CA asap.  One of the CA's in OH should deal just with these issues if possible, since these can help students who have invested a very large amount of time score more than just 0 for their efforts.
 
Good luck with it.

David
Hi all.  This is especially important for some of you who are scoring 0 by the autograder.
 
When it loads your file, Python will run any code you have that is outside of any functions (so-called "top-level" code).  If that code has a bug and crashes, or has an infinite loop, this will kill the autograder before it has a chance to even grade.  So you will score 0, even with otherwise perfectly working code.  Ack.
 
So:  be sure not to have any code outside of any functions, at least not above the #ignore_rest line.  You can put whatever you want BELOW that line, since as the line says, the autograder will ignore the rest of the file below that line.
 
Good luck wrapping up hw2.

David
Hi all.  To decrease email traffic, I posted several announcements at once, and I'll only send this one "Announcement announcement" via email.  But please read all of these:
 
  * Please do not post follow-ons to Instructor posts
  * OH vs Tutoring
  * Eschew Heroic Sessions
  * How to draw a circle
  * Leading 0's
  * rgbString(r, g, b) for custom colors
 
Good luck with the hw today.
 
David
Hi again.  Some of you may have noticed the function rgbString(r, b, g), both in the notes and also in the hw2.py starter file.  That function is handy if you want to create a custom color.
 
To determine the color of some pixel on the screen, don't use Python.  Use some other tool.  There are lots of them.  One way is to take a screenshot and paste it into a paint program, then use the eyedropper in that programmer to select a pixel, then the color chooser to see the RGB (red,green,blue) values of that pixel.
 
Once you have rgb values, you can provide them to rgbString and you'll get back a color formatted properly so it can be used by Tkinter.  The notes provide examples of this.
 
David
Hi again.  A number of you are having issues with leading 0's.  Two things:
 
1) You do not have to worry about them.  First, how could you?  That is, how could you count or "get rid of" the leading 0s?  There are an infinity of them!  But you do not have to think about them at all for this problem.  Think about, say, 32.  If you asked any sensible person which digits are in that number, they'd say 3 and 2.  Not 0.
 
2) And be careful not to type in numbers with a leading 0.  If you enter 032, then Python will take this to mean the OCTAL (base 8) number 032, which is 3*8+2, or 26 in decimal.  Yuck!!!
 
David
Hi again.  So you of course know that you draw an oval by providing the bounds of the rectangle it fits in.  And to draw a circle, you provide the bounds of the square it fits in.  But we usually don't think of circles that way.  We usually think of circles as having a center (cx, cy) and a radius r.  How do you draw that?
 
Well, the left edge would be one radius to the left of the center (right?).  Or (cx - r).
And the right edge would be one radius to the right of the center.  Or (cx + r).
And similarly for top and bottom.
 
Giving this:
 
canvas.create_oval(cx-r, cy-r, cx+r, cy+r)
 
By drawing circles that way, you can think of them more naturally using a center and a radius.
 
Hope this helps.

David
Hi all.  10+ hours (or even 5+ hours) straight in the cluster is too much.  Really.  You will be happier and healthier and more efficient if you stop somewhere in that time and leave for an hour or two.  Especially if you get some exercise, but even if you just lie in a field and count grass blades (though exercise is a much better option, if you are curious).
 
Seriously.  It is admirable in some sense that you are willing to forge ahead hour after hour.  But you quickly hit the point of diminishing returns, and getting away from the hw is your best bet for finishing it quickly!
 
Yes, I just said that stopping (for a while) will speed you up.  You bet.
 
So take breaks, get exercise, socialize a bit, eat right, sleep as much as you can, and you will be happier, healthier, and you will finish sooner with better work and better learning.
 
I do hope you take heed of this.  It works.  Whereas 10+ hour hw marathons do not.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi again.  Given the nature of office hours, when they are slow, say on Wednesday night, CA's can sit with you for extended periods, effectively providing 1-on-1 or small-group tutoring.  But that is impossible during busy office hours.  At those times (such as surely today will be), CA's have to move quickly from student to student, and each stop must be just a minute or two, max.  They can help you with debugging questions.  They can help with design questions.  But they cannot help at that time in that setting with "How do I start?" questions, or "What is the difference between a 'for' and 'while' loop?" questions, and so on.

Those sorts of questions are important, and we WILL answer them for you, of course.   But they require extended tutoring sessions.
 
For those, please contact your CA to set them up.
 
Good luck wrapping up the hw.
 
David
Hi all.  Some of you keep doing this.  Please stop.  Please instead make private posts to "Instructors".  Thanks.
Hi all.  So about 1/3rd of you are now done with hw2.  Kudos!

But that means about 2/3rds of you are not done.  And tonight was busy as it was.  Tomorrow is going to be very busy.  Which brings us to the "Busy Office Hour Protocol".
 
First, please understand that it will be busy, and it will get increasingly busy as the day goes on.  So get there as early as possible (of course, for shortest waits, get there a few days ago, when the waits were negligible...).
 
Second, even though our CA's put in collectively over 600 hours per week, there still is a limit to how much time they can invest in this course.  It's a LARGE limit, but a finite one.  And we will be unable to staff tomorrow's office hours sufficiently to give you rapid, or even not-so-rapid, turnaround times.  Even if we put 10 CA's there, it would probably not be enough.
 
Third, we really want to encourage and promote you starting early and spreading your time across the office hours from Wednesday night through Sunday night.  Which is why they are all staffed.  But staffing Wednesday night, in this zero-sum game, means fewer CA's for the Sunday night mad rush to the finish line.  That's how it will be each week.  So please do start early in the future.
 
Anyhow, having said all that, we will direct what resources we can to tomorrow, and try our best to help you.
 
So:
 
* Please do place your name in the queue if you need help
 
* Please do not place your name in the queue if you do not need help (guessing you might by the time your name comes up)
 
* Please do not place your name in the queue more than once
 
* Please remain calm and understanding that the CA's are doing their very level best (as are you, no doubt!)
 
There's more, but you get the idea.  Be reasonable.  And we'll do our best.
 
Thanks, and good luck with it.
 
David
Hi all.  19 of you are completely done with hw2 now.  I sure hope more of you hit office hours soon and get hw2 wrapped up today.  It's a great feeling waking up on a Sunday with your 15-112 hw already done!!!  :-)
 
For those who are done, and are looking for a fun and challenging diversion, here are a couple ideas:
 
First, for a modest diversion, try to draw some other interesting graphics.  You would be amazed at just how powerful the tools you now have can be.  Some students have already sent me some really nice pieces of digital art they made this week.  Go for it.  Have fun!
 
Second, here's a hard challenge:  consider each of the following functions:
Hi all.  Note that the private autograder (the one used by Autolab) is different from the public autograder (the one distributed with the hw).  The private one is stricter, with more tests.  So it is entirely possible to "pass" the public autograder and then lose points when you make a formal submission.
 
Our goal, of course, is for you to become competent, confident, self-sufficient programmers.  So by the end of the course, you have to not need an autograder at all, public or private.  But to ease the learning curve, we start you out with a public autograder that is close to the private autograder.  As the semester progresses, the public autograder will (quickly) become less helpful, leaving more and more of the testing and debugging of your code to you.
 
For now, you can and should add more tests beyond the public autograder's tests.  That's a good thing.
 
But in any case, you should understand that there is a difference between the public and private autograders, and it's the latter one that determines your grade on the hw.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  The private autograder was temporarily misreporting for nthGoofyPrime.  This has been fixed, and the erroneous submissions have all been regraded.  Sorry about the confusion.
 
David
Hi again.  Last post from me for a while (I'm off to my son's football game).

When solving some hw problems, you can and really should write some of your own well-chosen helper functions.  These are functions that you think will help you solve the problem.  If you write a function foo, though, you should also write a function testFoo(), which tests that function, so that you are confident that your function works.  (Caveat: you can't easily test graphics functions this way, though, so no need there...)
 
In any case, please do make your own helper functions, for this hw and from now on!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Now that we are into a SOLO hw, I just can't stress enough how essential it is that you go to office hours (unless you are totally 100% on top of the hw, and even then it's probably a good idea).
 
There are so may benefits of office hours.  When you have questions, CA's are nearby (though of course take some time to think it through before asking).  And you are away from distractions (this alone is a huge win).  And you are near others doing the hw (it's fun being part of our community of learners).  And there is some "ambient goodness" that occurs when you overhear CA's answering other students' questions (which is ok -- if the CA's wanted to provide a truly private answer, they'd ask the student to step outside the cluster).  And, and, and...
 
Start the hw today if you have not done so.  And get to office hours.  It will make a huge difference.
 
Good luck with it.
 
David
Hi all.  We are getting lots of questions like:  "Here is my code, please tell me where the bug is."  We can't answer that question.   You have to find your own bugs.  But we are happy to help give you techniques to do that.
 
Probably the single best technique is to add some print statements to your code (which you will remove once you found the bug).  In some key places, just print out a label where you are in the code (sometihng like "at start of loop") and then all the variable values.  Something like this:
    print "at start of loop, x=", x, ", and y=", y
 
Then run your code and very carefully look at all the printed output, and verify that it is all as you expected.  Eventually, one of the print statements will not be as expected (assuming you have a bug), and then a close inspection of that output almost always reveals the location and nature of the bug.
 
Use print statements extensively as your first line of defense when debugging.
 
And please do this before asking us to help.
 
And in any case, please do not ask "where is my bug", since we would be hurting you more than helping you if we told you.
 
Carpe diem.

David

As the subject says, you do not have to solve that (harder) problem.  Even so, you might want to give it a go, just for fun.  :-)
 
David
Hi all.  Some of you may be experiencing the same crashing behavior on your Macs that I was experiencing during lecture yesterday.  Here is how to fix it:
 
1) Install the most up-to-date Python 2.7.5 from python.org
 
and
 
2) Install the appropriate TCL from the table here:
   http://www.python.org/download/mac/tcltk/
For most of you on recent Macs, that would be ActiveTcl 8.5.14.
 
That's it!  Good luck with it.
 
DavidHi all.  So you know:  despite my natural inclination to be on a more college-friendly diurnal cycle (sleep until noon, stay up until the wee hours), it's not how our household lives.  We get up early.  Very early.  Before 5am in any case.  This has many upsides.  The world is quiet and lovely at that hour.  And you can get a LOT done before everyone else wakes up.  All good things.
 
There is a major downside, though:  I have to get to sleep around the time when many of you are probably just starting to think about what you might do for the night.
 
Anyhow, practically speaking, this means:  if you want rapid response after 10pm (sometimes even a bit earlier than that), please be sure to use Piazza rather than email to me.  Of course, I'll still respond to your late-night emails (I always respond to emails), but typically not until daybreak.
 
Thanks for your understanding.  And good night!
 
DavidHi all.  For your studying pleasure, quiz1 (both versions) is now available on the course website.
 
Also, for kicks, type this into a Python shell:   import antigravity
 
Cheers.
 
David
Hi all.  I didn't discuss this last night, so figured I'd post it here.  It's useful for hw2.  Say we have a numeric value stored in a variable n, and we want the variable d to loop over each digit in n.  How can we do that?  Here's a hint or two...
 
We'll use two operations.  One will get the one's digit from a number.  The other will shift the number one digit to the right (say, converting 1234 to 123). 
 
1) Get the one's digit of a number
This is easy enough.  Just use %.  What is (n%10)? Why?
 
2) Shift the number one to the right
Ok, what does this do:   n /= 10  ?  Again, why?
 
Now, we need to keep doing this combination (extract one's digit, shift number one digit to right) over and over -- in a LOOP -- until we are done.  When are we done?
 
The rest is left to you.
 
Good luck!
 
David
Hi all.  Please be sure to make your posts private.
 
And send them to "Instructors" (that is, the entire staff).
 
And do not respond to my announcements.
 
All this will help us keep down the already-very-large amount of course-wide traffic, while also letting us give you the best and fastest help we can.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Hi all.  A few more things:
 
* Graded quizzes will be returned at recitation.
 
* The original, non-adjusted quiz1 median was around 49.  Definitely needs to go up...
 
* In general, grading questions should first go to Andre (asutanto).  If questions persist, then please come see me.
 
Cheers
 
David
Hi all.  Autolab grades are now current through hw1 and quiz1.
 
The groupwork-heavy hw1 median was 100.  Future hw's will likely not have quite so high a median.  :-)
 
The wake-up call that was quiz1 went predictably, which is to say not as well as we hope for on future quizzes.  Even so, the adjusted median was 70 (your score in Autolab already includes this adjustment).
 
The quiz1 results made it clear that we need more solo work now, and so shall it be.  With some solid solo hw's and perhaps some more thorough quiz prep, I should think the quiz scores will soon be where we need them.
 
Let's make it happen!
 
David
 Hi all. In addition to our copious in-house office hours (which should be much more heavily consumed this week, what with the solo hw and all), CMU's Academic Development office also offers walk-in tutoring.  Their 15-112 walk-in tutoring is on Monday nights from 8:30-11:00 p.m. in the Mudge Reading Room.  Another fine resource for you to leverage!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  This post is only for those students who have qualified through Larry Powell's office for university-approved extended time on quizzes and exams.
 
First, unfortunately I did not convey this properly prior to quiz1, so anyone who has university-approved extended time and did not receive it on quiz1 should come see me at once (sorry for the confusion).
 
Looking ahead, for any quiz you have the following options:
  1) Take the quiz in class, but not with extended time
  2) Take the quiz at my next office hours after the quiz, with extended time
  3) Take the quiz proctored by Larry Powell's office at the time of your choosing on the same day of the quiz.
 
The third option is really only a fallback in case we just can't make option 2 work, and should not be exercised in general.
 
If you opt for 2 or 3, then you may either stay in the class while we take the quiz (and read quietly if you wish), or you may leave the class at that time and return afterwards, your choice.
 
Please let me know if you have any questions or concerns about this policy.
 
Thanks.
 
David

Hi all.  In addition to hw2, the entire outline of the semester schedule is now posted.  Until we cover a topic, though, the schedule is only tentative.

That said, you can count on the midterms occurring as scheduled.
 
Also, you can count on there being no homework and no pending quiz over mid-semester break.  And we will provide some sort of alternate lecture for those who might miss the Tuesday before Thanksgiving.
 
Please let me know if you have any questions or concerns about the schedule.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Hw2 is now posted.  It is due Sunday at 10pm.  It is entirely solo.  You are strongly urged to hit the ground running, starting tonight if possible.
 
Reminder: those who qualify for university-approved extensions (athletic trips, academic events, religious holidays, etc) should contact me to receive them.
 
In any case, good luck with it!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David

Hi all.  While tonight's duplicate lecture is in response to those students who need to miss tomorrow's lecture, it is actually open to anyone.  You can attend tonight instead of tomorrow if you wish.  8pm-9:20pm, 7500 Wean Hall.
 
Carpe diem.

David
 
And in response to a student question:  I will be lecturing tonight.  :-)

Hi all.  For those who cannot attend tomorrow's lecture:  Just confirming that either a CA or I will give a duplicate of tomorrow's lecture tonight from 8 to 9:20pm in 7500 Wean Hall.  Note that this was the most popular time by far of those who responded to the poll.  For those who cannot make it tonight or tomorrow, sorry...  Please work with your CA's to cover what you missed.
 
David
Hi all.  Please note that from now on the 9am lecture will meet in DH 2210 (same location as the 10:30am lecture). This is a much better room for us.
 
Cheers.
 
David
Hi all.  Ok, so quiz1 is done, and for some of you, maybe it didn't go perfectly.  No worries.  Really.  But now we have to get to work mastering that material.  Mastery is a much higher bar than conversancy.  We don't want you to sort-of understand the material.  We want you to ace it.  To totally get it.  To establish a firm bedrock of fundamentals upon which you can build your future academic edifice.
 
To that end..  There will be two (duplicate), optional, extra practice sessions tonight.  The first from 8-9pm, the next from 9-10pm, both in 7500 Wean Hall.
 
If you are the slightest bit unsure of week1's material, you are urged to attend.  Every little bit helps.
 
Carpe diem.

David
Hi all.  So most of you did a great job on hw1, and clearly worked alone on the solo portion.  Good work.  But a tiny percentage of submissions are making our automated plagiarism detector unhappy. Thing is, with hw1 being so short, there isn't quite enough there to be sure of malfeasance (except for wholesale duplicate copying, which fortunately did not happen).
 
So we are not going to do anything about the unhappy plagiarism detector.   But please, if you are in that small group (really, just a few students) who made it unhappy (and you likely know who you are), please take steps from here on out to make it less unhappy.  Because if it continues to be unhappy, so might you be.
 
As for the rest of you, the 99% who are doing this the right way, sorry for the spam, and please continue doing all the great work you've been doing so far!

Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Since a large number of you will miss Thursday's lecture (for several university-approved reasons), I will provide a duplicate lecture to Thursday's lecture on Wednesday night from 8 to 9:30pm in 7500 Wean Hall.  Anyone may attend that lecture, and if you attend that lecture, you do not have to attend Thursday's lecture.  Of you may attend a duplicate, if you wish.  :-)
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Please note that my office hours today are moved to 2-4pm (instead of noon-2pm).  Here are my scheduled office hours for this week:
 
Tue:  2-4pm
Wed: 7-8pm
Thu: noon-2pm
 
Thanks.
 
David
Hi all.  With over 96% of you scoring 15/15 on hw1-solo, you are collectively off to a strong start.  Well done!!!  Of course, things may get a bit more challenging moving forward, but this is a very nice way to start out the semester.  Kudos!
 
And many of you will likely take today off of 15-112.  And that's fine.  You earned it.  The general flow of the course is that a "week" starts with a lecture on Tuesday, homework released on Wednesday, more lectures and recitations and such, homework due Sunday night (*).  So, usually, nothing is assigned over Monday.  This leaves Monday (today) as a day for tutoring, studying, and catching up as needed.  (Actually, Tuesday is also somewhat that way, too.)
 
So here we are.  Our first Monday.  And...
 
For the 3.7% of you who did not score 15/15 on hw1-solo, and also for the perhaps 5-10% more of you who did score 15/15 but were a bit shaky:  your situation is not dire, not hopeless, but absolutely needs to be addressed.  Right away.  Now, today, Monday, is the time to fix this.  Do not lose the chance, since week 2 takes off tomorrow, but today there is the planned lull just to give you a chance to catch up.
 
You have some options:
Attend CA office hours, tonight 8-10pm, in the 5th floor clusters (probably 5205, but one of those three clusters in any case, just look for the blue hoodies)

Attend one of the two make-up sessions.  We won't have these every week, but we do have them this week, and they are open to anyone who wishes to attend.  Again, they are tonight from 4pm-7:30pm and again from 7:30pm-11pm, both in 5409 Wean Hall.

Get tutoring from your CA.  Unfortunately, we do not have nearly enough resources to provide 1-on-1 or small-group tutoring to all of you every week.  However, we do provide this service to our students who are struggling the most.  Your CA will contact you soon if they suspect you are in that situation.  But you also do not have to wait, and can contact your CA any time if you think you need tutoring.  Again, we are resource constrained, so we cannot provide arbitrary amounts of tutoring, but we will do our best to meet your needs.

Get tutoring from Academic Development.  This is another free university resource available to you:
   http://www.cmu.edu/acadev/programs/tutoring/index.html
They provide 1-on-1 and small-group tutoring, too.  I urge you to use that resource wisely, as any other resource available to you.
Get tutoring from friends.  CMU is crawling with students who know this stuff very well, many of whom would be happy to help you learn the material.  Find them, work with them, thank them.  Then, one day in the future, turn the tables around and be that person providing tutoring for someone else who needs it....

Post questions to Piazza.  If you just have a question or two, that's a great way to go.  However, for those scoring below 15/15, it's likely you'd benefit more from extended instruction and tutoring (one of the previous options).
You get the idea.  There are many options.  The only bad option is to do nothing.  Be proactive.  Address your concerns today.  Use your resources wisely.
 
Carpe diem.  What does it mean?  Seize the day.  And here we are, today.  Seize it.
 
David
Hi again.  So this is when the first wave of concern starts for some students.  While some students are just coasting along now, plenty of others are struggling with the material and are feeling a bit overwhelmed.  If you are in that second group, here are a few things to bear in mind:
This is expected. In fact, I said it would be like this...

You are not alone.  Dozens of students are in the same boat.

We have lots of support available for you.  And that support works.  Really.
So, some advice, based on past experiences of students in your situation:
First, Don't Panic.  You are ok.  You will be ok, too.

Second, use your resources wisely.  Work with classmates when allowed.  Work with the blue-hoodied CA's just as much as you can.  Go to CA office hours.  Go to my office hours.  Use Piazza.  Use tutors from Academic Development.  We have a large, capable, and enthusiastic support network for you. Use it.  We are here for you.  We will support  you, and you will be fine.
Now, if you do that, here's a couple more truths:
This may not get better right away.  Next week may be tougher, and the next tougher yet.  Just be realistic, and understand that you cannot make everything all better right away.  But...

This WILL get better.  History says it will.  Almost 99% of you will pass this course, and of the very few who do fail, historically basically all of them will have stopped trying at some point.  So long as you keep trying, so long as you keep using your resources wisely, you'll be fine.
Also, one more thing:
For most people, the best part of this course, by far, is the term project.  And while we routinely see maybe 10-15% of our students struggling (perhaps even quite a bit) at the outset of the course, by the time we get to the last month, nearly everyone can do a reasonably nice and satisfying term project.
Last thing:  I am always available to help, to support you, and just to chat.  Office hours are best for most concerns, but I can meet other times as needed, too.  Please do take me up on the offer.
 
Finally, especially when you think you cannot, be sure to get plenty of sleep, even in the face of challenging deadlines.  And get regular exercise.  And eat well.  And be well.  Do that and then work with the CA's and with me to get your academics in this course on track. 

Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Please be ready to take a quiz on week 1's material on Tuesday.  The quiz will cover anything from the notes or the hw.  It may be in any format and of any duration, but typically most quizzes are fairly similar to the preceding semesters.  And all those quizzes are available online, in case you wish to study from them.
 
Note that the quizzes not only require that you know the material, but that you know it well enough to move reasonably quickly through straightforward (if perhaps a bit challenging) problems.  There will not be any trick questions.  But you certainly will be expected to understand how to trace code, reason over code, debug code, write functions, and to write test functions.  Of course, all this will be limited to the operators and built-in functions we covered (no loops, no conditionals, no lists, etc).  Plus, the emphasis will be on the most important parts of that, and not on some obscure issues (so, for example, I would not invest huge amounts of time, say, understanding the subtle differences between 0 and 0L).
 
Good luck, and...  Carpe diem!
 
David
Hi all.  A few of you have been unable to get Autolab working because you were submitting zip files to it.  For hw1, Autolab is expecting a Python file (hw1-solo.py).  You don't technically have to name it hw1-solo.py, since Autolab renames it anyhow when you submit.  But it does have to be a Python file (a .py file), and not a zip file.
 
By the way, if you do submit a zip file, you'll get this very cryptic error from Autolab:
 
Your file contains tokens that are not allowed in this hw.
Error: Illegal token -- ] -- in row 1 col 85 of file hw1.py
 
Ugh.  Not very helpful.
 
Anyhow, forewarned is forearmed.
 
Good luck wrapping up hw1.
 
David
Hi all.  This is for those students who missed some part of hw1, whether for academic events, athletic trips, or joining the course late.  This is even for those who have no excuse for missing part of hw1, but still wish to cover the material they missed (without obtaining points for doing so, just to not fall behind).  For anyone in this situation, please read this note carefully.
 
There are 4 parts to hw1:  A, B, C, and D.  Part D is the solo portion, and that is still due tonight for everyone.  However, if you qualify for an extension on hw1 for university-approved reasons, please let me know immediately, and if I agree, I will record that extension in Autolab.  Otherwise, if you cannot submit the hw1 solo portion by tonight, still submit it by tomorrow night at 10pm, since you'll get 75% of the credit by then.  After then, no credit.
 
As for hw1 parts A, B, and C, we will host two duplicate make-up sessions for students who missed these (again, this is not an extension, so if you missed these without an excuse, while you may attend, you will not receive credit for doing so, though you are indeed welcome to join us).
 
The first session is tomorrow (Monday), 4pm to 7:30pm, in 5409 Wean Hall.
 
The second session, which is a duplicate of the first session, is also tomorrow (Monday), from 7:30pm to 11pm, also in 5409 Wean Hall.
 
Those who missed part of hw1 (A, B, or C) should attend ONE of these two sessions tomorrow.
 
Note that this plan will provide a compressed hw1 experience, since we can only do so much in 3.5 hours.  But we'll do our best to give you as much coverage as possible as we head into week 2.  Just be sure to be on time, and be ready to learn!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  By far the most common question we are getting involves this issue.  The dayOfWeeek function returns a value of 7 for Saturday.  However, the (big, complicated, and somewhat mystic) formula that it uses uses a value of 0 for Saturday.  The problem statement calls out this discrepancy, and notes that you will have to find a way to deal with this.  It's not a bug or a fault in either the problem or the autograder, it's just a problem you have to solve.  Good luck with it!

David
 
PS: 209 of you now have 15/15 on the solo part.  Nice job!  But that still leaves perhaps 150-200 more...
Hi all.  We do not wish to use Piazza as something of a public discussion forum (which can indeed be interesting, but which can also be somewhat randomizing; besides, you all already have plenty enough to read), so please do not post follow-ups to announcements, which are publicly-visible.
 
We love helping you, whether on Piazza or otherwise, but ask that you follow this simple protocol:
 
All your posts to Piazza should be private and should be sent to "Instructors", which means that everyone on the staff will see it, so we can give you the fastest possible response times.
 
Thanks.
 
David
Hi all.  So far, 137 students have scored 15/15 on the solo portion.  Nice job!  What's more, office hours have been light but steady, and relatively calm.  Most students have needed some small help here or there, but with no deadline looming, and light attendance, this was all managed in a calm and easygoing manner.
 
Tomorrow daytime may be busier and perhaps a bit less calm, with the deadline later that same day.
 
Tomorrow night will be busy and perhaps even a tad hectic, with the deadline looming large.  And as we get into the final hour, there can be an increasingly long wait for help, even when we have lots of CA's at office hours.
 
There's an obvious hint lurking here:  start early.  You'll enjoy better support (no long queues!), less stress, and you'll be really happy when the due date rolls around and you are already done and onto other things.
 
It's just like rush hour.  A short, pleasant commute can become long and arduous just by doing it when everyone else is.  So avoid the holiday rush and do your homework today if possible!
 
Regardless:  good luck with it!
 
Carpe diem.

David
Hi all.  Whoops.  As many of you have let me know via email, I had Autolab all set up except for your user accounts (whoops).  Well... That is fixed now.  When you log in, please click on Account / Edit this information, and be sure all the information is accurate.  Thanks.
 
Also, I created accounts for folks on the waitlist who also got on the attendance lists for lecture and/or recitation this week.  If you feel you should be included but did not attend either, send me an email, but include an explanation as to why this occurred, and we'll see.
 
In any case, the accounts are there so hopefully you can now all use Autolab without further ado.  Sorry again for the confusion, and good luck with it.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi again.  The course website now contains all the CA names (listed by recitation section), andrew id's, pictures, and office hours!
 
You are strongly encouraged to visit office hours.  You would be amazed how much easier and more effective and less stressful and more fun learning this material can be if you are in the general vicinity of blue-hoodied CA's!  :-)
 
By the way:  office hours run both today and tomorrow from 2pm to 10pm!
 
Good luck with hw1.  And...
 
Carpe diem!
 
David
Hi all.  The course website now contains a link to our live Autolab system. To submit the hw1-solo portion:  Click on the autolab link, then click on hw1, then click on "Handin your work", then find your hw1-solo.py file and submit.
 
Then...  Wait a moment and refresh the page.
 
Eventually (perhaps after a half minute or so), you will see a number in the Autoscore column.  This is your grade, this week out of 15 points.  You can and should CLICK ON IT to see why you got that grade, especially if the grade is below 15/15.
 
For example, I submitted the unmodified starter file, and of course scored 0/15.  However, clicking on the 0 gave me this feedback:
 
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Failed test: 
Test code: celsiusToFahrenheit(0) 
Expected result: 32 
Observed result: 42 
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Failed test: 
Test code: dayOfWeek(2, 5, 2006) 
Expected result: 1 
Observed result: 42
 
As you can see, Autolab told me exactly which tests failed, what the result it expected was, and what the result that it observed (that is, the result my incorrect code provided, which was 42 in each case).  How helpful!
 
Now you can go edit your file, convince yourself you have it correct, and resubmit to Autolab.
 
For now, you may submit as often as necessary (but please keep it down to a minimum, say 5 or less).  Soon, we will limit your submissions to avoid excess dependence on Autolab.
 
Also, eventually you will get partial credit for solutions that are partially correct.  This week, however, the two exercises are rather simple, and the scoring is all-or-nothing for each of them.
 
Also, eventually Autolab may include a lot of test cases that we did not include in the assignment we provided to you.  This is so that you get really good at testing your code.  However, this week the test cases are nearly identical to what we provided to you.
 
Also, as already noted, some of you may experience technical difficulties when submitting to Autolab.  And so...  You are encouraged to submit to Autolab as early as possible.  If you have problems, go to office hours today or tomorrow.
 
Good luck!
 
David
Hi all.  This will be on the course website by tomorrow, but here is the OH schedule (which is subject to change):
 
Monday 8-10 pm, 1 CA
Tuesday 8-10 pm, 1 CA
Wednesday 7-9.30 pm, 2 CAs
Thursday 6-10 pm, 2 CAs
Friday 6-10 pm, 2 CAs
Saturday 2-6 pm 2 CAs, 6-10 pm 3 CAs
Sunday 2-4 pm 2 CAs, 4-8 pm 3 CAs, 8-10 pm 4 CAs
 
You are highly encouraged to start your group sessions asap and to work at or near the CA's office hours.
 
If we do not publish a different location, these will be in one of the GHC 5th floor clusters, which are the rooms of computers not too far from my office and the Pausch Bridge.  Just look for the blue hoodies!
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Well, we're off and running!  I hope things are going well for you so far.  Some of you are clearly on square footing, charging ahead.  Kudos!  Others are clearly struggling a bit (as expected).  If you are in that latter group, don't worry, this stuff can make your head spin at first.  Just keep at it, and work closely with your CA's.  They make a huge difference in how quickly and effectively you can learn this material.
 
In any case, here are some announcements for this summery Friday morning:
vim / ssh / Komodo / etc
The Getting Started section refers to editors besides IDLE, including vim and Komodo.  As announced in class, this semester you can ignore that.  Just stick with IDLE.  That said, you are welcome to use other editors if you prefer, but you also must know how to use IDLE, say for quizzes or exams, if we choose to do them on computers.

Blackboard
We do not use blackboard.

Autolab
It will be set up this weekend.  We don't like to publish autograders too early in the hw cycle, otherwise history suggests that students form unhealthy dependencies on them.  I will make an announcement when autolab is available.

500 not 100
I made a typo in a recent post (good catch, some of you!).  I fixed it in Piazza right away, but the email went out saying 500 where it should have said 100.  Sigh.

Missing hw link
A number of you noticed that the hw link was not present after I said it was on the course website.  It was present, you just had to refresh the page.  Thing is, if you just hit refresh, the page will not refresh the *frame* that contains the schedule.  So...  On Windows, right-click on the frame and choose Refresh Frame, and on a Mac, control-click on the frame and choose Reload Frame.  And magically the link shall appear!

Away for the weekend
Several of you have noted you'll be away for the weekend on social trips (rather than university-approved absences).  We cannot grant extensions in such cases.  But we can try to accommodate, say by allowing you to collaborate via Skype.  In that case, please try to meet at least for part of the 3 hours prior to leaving.  Also, the CA 1-hour meetings can move to Monday if necessary (not ideal, but ok).  This should help in such cases, too.

Hw size
We have reformulated the approach to hw so that, even though it contains a lot of problems, by time-capping them and by using more CA-led instruction at this stage of the semester, the entire hw should not take you more than 8 hours.  If you are pushing past 10 hours, please stop!  See your CA.  We are fixing the problem of past semesters where some students have to spend 15-20+ hours on this homework.  Don't do that!  Everything but the solo part is time-capped and so will take a reasonable amount of time (even though, yes, there are a lot of problems to cover in that time).  Don't let the solo portion explode into a 10-hour nightmare.  No.  Go see CA's!   They won't give away answers, but I assure you that the more you struggle the better it is to be near them.  Good luck with it.
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Please be sure to bring your laptops (with batteries fully charged) to these 2-hour sessions.  Try to have Python properly installed beforehand.  Your CA will be sure you have it installed properly.  Plus, there should be enough time for you to make an attempt to solve at least some of the problems.  This is good.  You want to go through the problem-solving process yourself, as well as seeing it done by your CA.
 
The hard part of programming is not the syntax, it's not what the % or the ^ operator does, it's not knowing what the builtin functions do, etc, etc.  The hard part is problem-solving, with top-down design, thorough testing, and efficient debugging.  Those things are hard to explain and hard to do, even for many seemingly "easy" problems. What's more, those things are best learned only one way -- through lots and lots of practice.
 
So let the practice commence!
 
Carpe diem.

David
Hi all.  My office hours will be 12pm-1:30pm today, and 12pm-2pm tomorrow.  See (some of) you there! 
 
Oh, and about my office hours:  please do use them!  By the definition of office hours: the door is open, my schedule is cleared, and I am there for you.  Any topic or question you have is fair game, though given the sheer numbers involved, you might try Piazza or CA office hours to get faster responses for your technical questions, thoughI am happy to answer those, too.
 
And do not stand in the hallway!  First, it clogs up the hallway (not good).  Second, worse, I'll not know you are out there (ugh).  So please just come on in.  There are plenty of seats, and the more of you the merrier (well, with some reasonable outer limit).  We do it this way because history suggests that it's very useful (or can be, usually) for others to hear your questions and my answers.  Of course, if privacy is required (as it sometimes is), we can ask everyone to step outside briefly.
 
Also, the waits sometimes can get long. Sorry.  If it gets long enough, we'll form a queue on the whiteboard, which may help a little, but not much.  In any case, I think it's more important to provide good help than to provide fast help, though of course it's ideal to do both.  That's my goal, at least.
 
Carpe diem.
 
David
Hi all.  Sorry for the inconvenience, but...  To get your questions answered promptly, please make your private posts to "Instructors", so that all 33 staff members have a chance to answer them.  This will ensure you get the fastest, bestest support.
 
Thanks!
 
David
Hi all.  Hw1 will be posted tomorrow and still due Sunday, but it will be designed taking this shorter-than-usual turnaround time into account, so it will definitely be manageable.
 
One thing:  as part of hw1, you will have to meet with one of your section's CA's (even if you are just waitlisted) for a 2-hour practice session, where your CA's will lead you through the solutions to last semester's hw1.  This activity should help you learn the material better and faster and with less stress.  At least that's the hope.  Also, you do not have to look at those problems prior to meeting with your CA's, but you may if you wish.
 
In any case, you should be hearing from your CA's tonight, if you haven't already, to set up these meetings.  They will provide several times for you to choose from.  Note that these meetings are required part of hw1, so please be sure to attend so you can get full credit on hw1.
 
Have fun!  Carpe diem!

David
Hi again.  Another thing:  Piazza is great for mass communication, whether us sending something to all the students, or you sending something to all the staff.  When you want to send something to a particular person (me, Andre, Charlie, your CA, etc), please use good ol' email instead.  That's still the preferred person-to-person communication medium (at least for 15-112).  Thanks!
David 
Hi again.  Some of you are on the waitlist and yet enrolled in Piazza.  This is so that you can participate in the course even while you remain on the waitlist.  So this does not mean that you are now enrolled in the course (sorry!).  Even so, the only way to become enrolled eventually is to participate fully all along in all aspects of the course (lectures, recitations, office hours, piazza, homeworks, quizzes, etc).  So welcome aboard, and we hope to get you enrolled asap.
David
Hi all.  If you are reading this, then you have properly enrolled in Piazza.  Good job.  We will be using Piazza for our online communications this semester.  This includes:
  * course-wide announcements from me or CA's to you
  * private questions you may ask of CA's (be sure to make your posts private!)
  * course-wide polls that we may take on occasion
 
Welcome aboard!  :-)
 
David